---
title: "Extended Legacy Format (ELF)"
subtitle: Date, Age and Time Microformats
date: 8 October 2019
numbersections: true
...

# Extended Legacy Format (ELF):<br/> Date, Age and Time Microformats

{.ednote ...} This is a **first public draft** of the microformats used
for dates, ages and times in FHISO's proposed suite of Extended Legacy Format
(ELF) standards.  This document is not endorsed by the FHISO membership,
and may be updated, replaced or obsoleted by other documents at any
time.

Comments, discussion and other feedback on this draft should be directed
to the [tsc-public@fhiso.org](http://tech.fhiso.org/tsc-public) mailing
list.

--------------           ---------------------------------------------
Latest public version:   `https://fhiso.org/TR/elf-dates`
This version:            `https://fhiso.org/TR/elf-dates-20181230`
--------------           ---------------------------------------------
{/}


FHISO's **Extended Legacy Format** (or **ELF**) is a hierarchical
serialisation format and genealogical data model that is fully
compatible with GEDCOM, but with the addition of a structured
extensibility mechanism.  It also clarifies some ambiguities that were
present in GEDCOM, and documents best current practice. 

The **GEDCOM** file format developed by The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints is the *de facto* standard for the exchange of
genealogical data between applications and data providers.  Its most
recent version is GEDCOM 5.5.1 which was produced in 1999, but despite
many technological advances since then, GEDCOM has remained unchanged.

{.note} Strictly, [GEDCOM 5.5] was the last version to be publicly
released back in 1996.  However a draft dated 2 October 1999 of a
proposed [GEDCOM 5.5.1] was made public; it is generally considered to
have the status of a standard and has been widely implemented as such.

FHISO are undertaking a program of work to produce a modernised yet
backward-compatible reformulation of GEDCOM under the name ELF, the new
name having been chosen to avoid confusion with any other updates or
extensions to GEDCOM, or any future use of the name by The Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.  This document is one of five that
form the initial suite of ELF standards, known collectively as ELF
1.0.0:

* **ELF: Primer**.  This is not a formal standard, but is being
  released alongside the ELF standards to provide a broad overview of
  ELF written in a less formal style.  It gives particular emphasis to
  how ELF differs from GEDCOM.

* **ELF: Serialisation Format**.  This standard defines a
  general-purpose serialisation format based on the GEDCOM data format
  which encodes a dataset as a hierarchical series of lines, and
  provides low-level facilities such as escaping.

* **ELF: Schemas**.  This standard defines flexible extensibility and
  validation mechanisms on top of the serialisation layer.  Although it
  is an *optional* component of ELF 1.0.0, future ELF extensions to ELF
  will be defined using ELF schemas.

* **ELF: Date, Age and Time Microformats**.  This standard defines
  microformats for representing dates, ages and times in arbitrary calendars,
  together with how they are applied to the Gregorian, Julian, French
  Republican and Hebrew calendars.  

* **ELF: Data Model**.  This standard defines a data model based on the
  lineage-linked GEDCOM form, reformulated to be usable with the ELF
  serialisation model and schemas.  It is not a major update to the
  GEDCOM data model, but rather a basis for future extension and
  revision.

{.ednote}  At the time this draft was published, none of the other
documents are yet at the stage of having a first public draft available,
however FHISO's Technical Standing Committee (TSC) are working on them
and hope to have first drafts available soon.  

An explanation of the conventions used in this standard can be found in
{§conventions}, and the general concepts associated with time, calendars
and uncertainty are defined in {§concepts}.  A generic syntax for
expressing dates in arbitrary calendars is given in {§generic}, which
{§modifiers} extends to support imprecisely known dates and dates
written in natural language, and {§DatePeriod} extends to support date
periods representing extended states of being.  Four specific calendars
are defined in {§calendars}, allowing the Gregorian, Julian, French
Republican and Hebrew calendars to be used in the generic date syntax.

This standard defines five datatypes so that the formats defined here
can be used in ELF.  The `elf:DateValue` datatype defined in
{§DateValue} is ELF's standard datatype for representing historical
dates, while the `elf:DatePeriod` datatype defined in {§DatePeriod} is
used to represent date periods, such as the period of coverage of a
source.  The `elf:DateExact` datatype defined in {§DateExact} is a more
restricted format for expressing exact dates in the Gregorian calendar,
and is used to record when ELF objects were created or last modified,
typically in conjunction with the `elf:Time` format defined in {§time}.
The `elf:Age` datatype defined in {§age} is used to represent
individuals' ages.  These datatypes contain only modest changes from
GEDCOM, but should serve as a basis for future work on calendars.

## Conventions used                                       {#conventions}

Where this standard gives a specific technical meaning to a word or
phrase, that word or phrase is formatted in bold text in its initial
definition, and in italics when used elsewhere.
The key words **must**, **must not**, **required**, **shall**, 
**shall not**, **should**, **should not**, **recommended**,
**not recommended**, **may** and **optional** in this standard are to be
interpreted as described in
&#x5B;[RFC 2119](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119)].

An application is **conformant** with this standard if and only if it
obeys all the requirements and prohibitions contained in this
document, as indicated by use of the words *must*, *must not*,
*required*, *shall* and *shall not*, and the relevant parts of its
normative references.  Standards referencing this standard *must not*
loosen any of the requirements and prohibitions made by this standard,
nor place additional requirements or prohibitions on the constructs
defined herein.  

{.note} Derived standards are not allowed to add or remove requirements
or prohibitions on the facilities defined herein so as to preserve
interoperability between applications.  Data generated by one
*conformant* application must always be acceptable to another
*conformant* application, regardless of what additional standards each
may conform to. 

If a *conformant* application encounters data that does not conform to
this standard, it *may* issue a warning or error message, and *may*
terminate processing of the document or data fragment.

This standard depends on FHISO's **Basic Concepts for Genealogical
Standards** standard.  To be *conformant* with this standard, an
application *must* also be *conformant* with [Basic Concepts].  Concepts
defined in that standard are used here without further definition.

{.note} In particular, precise meaning of *character*, *string*,
*whitespace*, *whitespace normalisation*, *language tag*, *term*,
*prefix notation*, *prefix*, *property*, *datatype* and *subtype* are
given in [Basic Concepts].

Indented text in grey or coloured boxes does not form a normative part
of this standard, and is labelled as either an example or a note.  

{.ednote} Editorial notes, such as this, are used to record outstanding
issues, or points where there is not yet consensus; they will be
resolved and removed for the final standard.  Examples and notes will be
retained in the standard.

The grammar given here uses the form of EBNF notation defined in §6 of
&#x5B;[XML](https://www.w3.org/TR/xml11/)], except that no significance is
attached to the capitalisation of grammar symbols.  *Conforming*
applications *must not* generate data not conforming to the syntax given
here, but non-conforming syntax *may* be accepted and processed by a
*conforming* application in an implementation-defined manner.  

{.note} In this form of EBNF, *whitespace* is only permitted where it
is explicitly stated in the grammar.  It is not automatically permitted
between arbitrary tokens in the grammar.

The grammar productions in this standard uses the `S` production defined
in §2 of [Basic Concepts] to match any non-empty sequence of
*whitespace* *characters*.

This standard defines five *datatypes* to represent time-related
concepts in ELF, each of which is identified by a *term name*, which is
simply an IRI.  The concept of a *datatype*, as used by FHISO, is
defined in §6 of [Basic Concepts], and the definition of each *datatype*
in this standard includes a table listing its formal *properties*.

{.note}  These *properties* include a formal statement that the
*datatype* is *datatype*, define the *pattern* and *non-trivial
supertypes* of the *datatype*, and say whether it is an *abstract
datatype*.  These concepts are defined in §6.1, §6.2 and §6.3 of [Basic
Concepts].  The *pattern* is a regular expression written in FHISO's
`types:Pattern` *datatype* defined in [FHISO Patterns].  This
information forms part of an abstraction which allows applications to
use a *discovery* mechanism to find out about unknown components, thus
allowing them to be processed in more sophisticated ways than could be
done with a truly unknown component.  To support this, FHISO's web
server has been configured to provide [Triples Discovery] on all *terms*
defined in this standard.  Such functionality is outside the scope of
this standard, and is entirely *optional* in ELF.  Most readers can
safely ignore this formalism and the tables of *properties* given for
each *datatype*.

This standard uses the *prefix notation*, as defined in §4.3 of [Basic
Concepts], when discussing specific *terms*.  The following *prefix*
bindings are assumed in this standard:

------           -----------------------------------------------
`elf`            `https://terms.fhiso.org/elf/`
`xsd`            `http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema#`
`types`          `https://terms.fhiso.org/types/`
------           -----------------------------------------------

{.note}  The particular *prefixes* assigned above have no relevance
outside this standard document as *prefix notation* is not used in the
formal data model as defined by this standard.  This notation is simply
a notational convenience which makes the standard easier to read.

## General concepts                                          {#concepts}

{.ednote}  It is anticipated that this section will be moved to [Basic
Concepts] in a future draft of these documents.

### Time                                                {#time-concepts}

An **instant** is defined as an infinitesimally brief point in time.

{.note}  Although defined as an infinitesimally brief point in time, it
may be subject to the various forms of uncertainty described in
{§uncertainty}.

{.example}  King Alfred's birth occurred at some particular *instant* in
the middle of the ninth century.  Even though the year is not known with
any great certainty, it is still an *instant*.

A **time interval** is defined as the section of time spanning
between two specific *instants*.

{.example}  The interval lasting from midday on 1 Feb 2018 until midday
on 14 Feb 2018 is a *time interval*. 

{.example}  The lifetime of a particular individual is another example
of a *time interval*, beginning at the *instant* of their birth and
ending with the *instant* of their death.

A **duration** is the length of time elapsing between two *instants*,
but without reference to any specific choice of start and end *instants*.

{.example} "3 days", and "34 years, 2 months" are two examples of
*durations* expressed in natural language.

{.note} *Durations* differ from *time intervals* in that *time
intervals* are *durations* with specific start and end *instants*.  A
*time inteval* has a *duration* associated with it, quantifying how long
it lasts.

{.note} ELF does not provide a general-purpose *duration* *datatype*,
but the `elf:Age` *datatype* defined in {§age} is a *datatype*
customised for representing the *duration* of an individual's life.

Fundamental to ELF's handling of dates is a set of *time intervals*
called **calendar days**, each of which spans from one midnight until
the next.

{.note} A *calendar day* lasts for 24 hours, except when leap seconds is
inserted or deleted, or when the local time zone changes, as in the
transition to or from daylight saving time. 
In practical terms, it is a period during which the sun rises and sets
exactly once, except in the polar regions.

{.note}  Because midnight does not occur simultaneously around the
world, the set of *calendar days* in one region may be offset compared
to those in another region.  The details vary depending on local
legislation and custom.  Currently, there can be three different
*calendar days* happening simultaneously in various parts of the world:
when a *calendar day* is just beginning in the Line Islands of Kiribati,
it is still the previous *calendar day* in most of world's landmasses,
and the *calendar day* before that in American Samoa.  This means it is
possible for a person to participate in an event on one *calendar day*,
travel to another region, and subsequently participate in an event on
the previous *calendar day*.  If the second event is the person's death,
this could theoretically result in a living person participating in an
event the *calendar day* after their death.

{.ednote}  Does this definition need loosening?  Not all cultures
consider the day to be begin at midnight.  The Hebrew calendar defined
in {§hebrew}, for example, is normally used with *calendar days*
beginning at sunset, which is defined as 6pm using variable length
hours.  The Islamic and Bahá'í *calendars* do similarly.  The definition
of a *calendar day* is currently taken from [ISO 8691], but should it be
loosened to allow such definitions?

A **date** is a way of identifying a particular *calendar day*.

{.note}  ELF *dates* do not include an indication of either the time zone
or the locale which leaves some ambiguity into the exact points in time
that are meant.  The [ISO 8601] concept of a *date* has the same
ambiguity.

{.ednote}  This standard deliberately does not specify whether the
*calendar day* 1 January 2018 in Vancouver is the same *calendar day* as
1 January 2018 in Paris, which started nine hours earlier than the
*calendar day* in Vancouver.  This is left unspecified because [ISO
8601] is similarly vague.  However if they are regarded as distinct
*calendar days*, they are represented by the same *date* in ELF.

{.note}  The definitions of an *instant*, a *time interval*, a
*duration*, a *calendar day* and a *date* given here are intended to be
fully compatible with the definitions of these concepts in [ISO 8601].
Any incompatibility between the definitions here and those in [ISO 8601]
is unintentional.

{.ednote}  These concepts have been defined here rather than by
normative reference to [ISO 8601] because of the cost involved in
obtaining a legal copy of [ISO 8601], and the likelihood that
implementers will not do so.

A **time of day** is a way of identifying an instant within a *calendar day*,
done by dividing an ordinary *calendar day* into 24 **hours**, each of
which is subdivded into 60 **minutes**, each of which is further divided
into 60 **seconds**.  In ELF, a *time of day* is represented by the `elf:Time`
*datatype* defined in {§time}.

{.note}  A *calendar days* may exceptionally be divided differently if a
leap second is inserted or deleted, or when the local time zone changes.

### Calendars                                            {#cal-concepts}

Many different systems for reckoning *dates* have been used throughout
history and in different parts of the world. Such systems are called
**calendars**, and ELF allows historical *dates* to be specified using
many different *calendars*.

{.example}  The simplest form of *calendar* is to count the number
of *calendar days* which have elapsed since a particular day zero.  The
most popular such *calendar* is called the Julian Day (which is 
unconnected to the similar-sounding Julian Calendar).  Its day zero
is 24 November 4714 BC in the proleptic Gregorian Calendar, a day
chosen to be before all recorded history.  Written as a Julian Day, 1
January 2000 can be represented by the integer 2451545.  Such
*calendars* are not commonly used for writing historical *dates* as they
are cumbersome and error-prone.

{.ednote} Nevertheless, FHISO might consider standardising the Julian
day as a lightweight *calendar* for use as a common intermediate
*calendar* during the conversion of *dates* from one *calendar* to
another.

Many *calendars* make use of units of time which are longer than a
*calendar day*, and the general framework for dates in ELF allows for
two such units of time, a **calendar month** and a **calendar year**,
whose definitions will be dependent on the particular *calendar*.

{.note}  It is intended that a *calendar year* will typically be unit of
time roughly equal to the time it takes the Earth to orbit the Sun, and
a *calendar month* will be a unit of time intermediate in duration between
a *calendar day* and a *calendar year*, and often loosely based
on the time it takes the Moon to orbit the Earth.  However these are not
requirements, nor is it a requirement that all *calendar years* or
all *calendar months* be of approximately equal length in a given
*calendar*.

{.ednote}  The flexibility to define *calendar years* and *calendar
months* arbitrarily might be exploited in the future.  FHISO are
considering whether there is merit to defining a calendar for the Julian
day.  If defined it would not be for general use expressing historical
*dates*, but rather to provide a way of expressing *epochs* in a
*calendar*-neutral way when defining *calendars*.  Because there is no
applicable notion of a *calendar month* or *calendar year* with Julian
days, and because the generic *date* syntax defined in {§generic} is
most natural with *calendars* that have a *calendar year*, it is quite
likely this *calendar* might define a *calendar year* and a
*calendar month* to be identical to a *calendar day*.  This standard
does not prohibit this.

An **incomplete date** is a way of identifying a particular *calendar
month* or *calendar year* without identifying a specific *calendar day*.

{.example}  In the Gregorian *calendar*, "June 1953" is an *incomplete
date* as it identifies a particular *calendar month*, but not a specific
*calendar day* within that month.

{.note}  Under this definition, an *incomplete date* is a *date* when it
is being used to identify a particular *calendar day*, but with limited
*precision*.  

An **epoch** is an *instant* which serves as a reference point for a
given *calendar* from which *calendar years* are numbered consecutively
with an integer called the **logical year**, which either increases
or decreases with time.  When the *logical year* number increases with
time, the *epoch* *shall* be first *instant* of the *calendar year*
with the *logical year* number 1.  When thee *logical year* number
decreases with time, the *epoch* *shall* be the last *instant* of the
*calendar year* with *logical year* number 1.

{.example ...}  The *epoch* used in many forms of the Islamic Calendar
is an *instant* during the Gregorian year AD&nbsp;622, the year of the
Hijrah when Muhammad moved from Mecca to Medina.  The first *calendar
year* of the Islamic *calendar*, called Anno Hegiræ 1 began at this
*epoch* and has the *logical year* number 1.  Subsequent Islamic
*calendar years* have been numbered sequentially, AH&nbsp;2, AH&nbsp;3,
etc., and have *logical year* numbers 2, 3, etc.
The *calendar year* immediately before the *epoch* is commonly labelled
1&nbsp;BH (standing for Before the Hijrah), and earlier *calendar years*
are numbered backwards from the *epoch*.  These have *logical year*
numbers 1, 2, 3, etc. too.  
{/}

{.note}  This definition does not limit a *calendar* to having a single
*epoch*.

A *logical year* number is not sufficient to identify a specific
*calendar year*: it is also necessary to state the particular *epoch*
from which *calendar years* are numbered, and whether *logical year*
numbers increase or decrease with time.  An **epoch name** is an
identifier which represents these two things.  An *epoch name* where
*logical year* numbers increase with time is called a **forwards epoch
name**, while an *epoch name* where *logical year* numbers decrease with
time is called a **reverse epoch name**.

{.example}  The Gregorian calendar has two distinct *epoch names*,
"AD", standing for Anno Domini, which is a *forwards epoch name*, and
"BC", standing for Before Christ, which is a *reverse epoch name*.
Both use the same *epoch*, defined as midnight at start of 1&nbsp;January
AD&nbsp;1.

The way years were counted in the past does not always fully coincide
with the modern reckoning of years in that calendar, which is what
defines the *logical year*, even though they are nominally reckoned from
the same *epoch*.  The year number according to the historical reckoning
is called the **historical year**.

{.example}  Prior to the adoption of the Gregorian *calendar* in many
parts of the world, the year was considered to begin on the Feast of the
Assumption (otherwise called Lady Day) which falls on 25 March.  This
was the case in England before 1752.  Sources contemporary to the event
record the execution Charles I as happening on 30 January 1648.  This
was in the month following December 1648 and would now be considered to
be in 1649, as a result of which modern accounts usually describe it as
happening on 30 January 1649.  (This is not a result a change of the
Julian *calendar* to the Gregorian one: in the Gregorian *calendar* this
*date* is 9 February 1649.)  In this example, 1649 is the *logical
year*, while 1648 is the *historical year*.

{.example}  The Byzantine *calendar* counted years since the supposed
beginning of the world with an *epoch* on 1 September 5509&nbsp;BC,
however in early times some alternative *dates* were assigned to this
*epoch*, including 25 March 5493&nbsp;BC, sometimes known as the
"Alexandrian" *epoch*.  A definition of this *calendar* which used the
traditional Byzantine *epoch* in 5509&nbsp;BC would have *logical years*
counted from then, but might also allow *historical years* to be counted
from the Alexandrian *epoch*.  This is an example where the *logical
year* and *historical year* differ by more than one.

A *calendar* defines how the number of *calendar days* in each *calendar
month* and the number of *calendar months* in each *calendar year* are
determined.  Stylistic and linguistic variations in the presentation of
a *date* do not constitute separate *calendars*.

{.example}  "31st August, 2018", "31 авг. 2018", "8/31/2018" and 
"2018年8月31日" are various ways in which the *date* which is
represented in [ISO 8601] as "`2018-08-31`" might be presented.  The
differences between these presentations are merely stylistic or
linguistic ones, and therefore these difference are not separate
*calendars*:  they are all written using the Gregorian *calendar*.

{.ednote}  In due course, FHISO will need to clarify and perhaps revise
this definition of what constitutes a distinct *calendar*.  Does Roman
day reckoning (e.g. "Prid. Kal. Sept" for 31 Aug) count as a separate
*calendar* or is just a stylistic variation?  What about regnal years
(e.g. "31 Aug 67 Eliz II")?  These are not strictly separate
*calendars*, but it could be convenient to consider them as such in ELF
if it is considered desirable for ELF to preserve the fact that the
dates were recorded in these forms.

### Uncertainty                                           {#uncertainty}

The **precision** of a stated value, such as a *date*, is a measure of
the specificity with which the value has been specified: the more
specifically, the greater the *precision*.  Values with relatively high
or low *precision* may be described as relatively **precise** or
**imprecise**, respectively.

{.example ...}  It is more *precise* to say that the Battle of Agincourt
was on St Crispin's Day, 1415, than it is to say that the battle occured
during Henry V's reign.  Both statements are true, but the former has
greater *precision* because it identifies the specific day of the
battle, while the latter identifies it only as falling within that
nine-year reign.  

Saying the battle was in the autumn of 1415 has an intermediate level of
*precision*.  This year might described as *precise* in comparision to
the whole of Henry V's reign, or as *imprecise* when compared to the
specific day.
{/}

{.note} Values are stated *imprecisely* for many reasons, including when
a more *precise* value is not known and when greater *precision* is
considered irrelevant.  Another reason is when the value being stated is
*inherently ambiguous*.

When the value being stated is the *instant* at which some entity
changed state, it is common for this *instant* not to be defined with
arbitrary *precision* because there is a *time interval* during the
transition when it is not well-defined what the state is.  The
*duration* of this *time interval* is known as the **inherent
ambiguity** of the *instant* of the change.

{.example}  Depending on the jurisdiction, the *precise* *instant*
during a wedding when the couple become married may be ill-defined as
there are several obvious possibilities.  It could be argued to occur
when the couple complete their vows, or when the priest declares the
couple husband and wife; or it might be when the last signature is put
on marriage certificate has been completed, or when the ceremony ends.
If there is no single accepted definition, then there is likely several
minutes of *inherent ambiguity* between the first and the last
possibilities.  This would be true even if the wedding had been videoed
and carefully timed, as it is not due to lack of information on what
happened and when.

A stated value is either **exactly stated** or **approximately stated**.
An *exactly stated* value is one where it is well-defined exactly what
values are considered to be consistent with the stated value.

{.example ...}  The *date* of the Battle of Agincourt was stated in
three different ways in the earlier example.  In order of decreasing
*precision* these were "St Crispin's Day, 1415", "the autumn of 1415",
and "during Henry V's reign".  The meaning of St Cripin's Day is
well-defined: it is 25 October.  Had the Battle of Agincourt in fact
occurred on 24 October 1415, this would not be consistent with the
statement that it happened on St Crispin's Day.  "St Crispin's Day,
1415" is therefore an *exactly stated* value.  "During Henry V's reign"
is similarly *exactly stated*.

"The autumn of 1415" is very likely not well-defined.  Some people
define it as stretching from the autumnal equinox in late September to
the winter solstice in late December, but this definition is by no
means universal.  Often it is used a more vague manner to refer to the
later part of the year in the northern hemisphere.  Unless context makes
it clear that a specific, well-defined meaning of word "autumn" was
intended, this is not an *exactly stated* value: it is therefore an
*approximately stated* value.

The battle might also be described as happening in about 1415.  This
statement is true as the battle did in fact occur in 1415, but it is an
*approximately stated* value.  Had the battle actually been in 1414,
would this be consistent with the description "about 1415"?  Probably.
But what about 1411?  Or 1401?  There is no general answer, and as a
result "about 1415" is an *approximately stated* value.
{/}

{.example}  These concepts do not only apply to quantitative values.  It
is more *precise* to say that a person was born in the commune of
Coutances, than to say say that person was born in metropolitan France.
"The commune of Coutances" and "metropolitan France" are both *exactly
stated* values.  The person might also be described as born in northern
France, which would normally be interpreted as an *approximately stated*
value.

The **precision range** of an exactly stated value is defined as the set
of values which would be considered consistent with the stated value.  
One specific measure of *precision* is the **precision range width**,
which is defined as the difference between the two most widely separated
values in the *precision range*.  When the value being specified is an
*instant*, its *precision range* is a *time interval*, and its
*precision range width* is a *duration*.

{.example}  If a person is said to have died in 1967, this is consistent
with the *instant* of their death being at any time between midnight at
the start of 1 January 1967 and midnight at the end of 31 December 1967.
The *time interval* between these two *instants* is the *precision
range* and is a *calendar year*.  In this example, the stated value is
1967 and its *precison range* is the *duration* 1 year.

{.example}  If a person is said to have married in the 1910s, it is
fairly clear this refers to a decade and therefore the *precision range*
is 10 years.  However if the person is said to have married in the
1900s, this might mean the decade or the century.  Without further
context, the intended *precision range* is unclear.

The **accuracy** of a value is a measure of how close a stated value is
to the true value.  A *exactly stated* value is said to **accurate** if
the true value lies within the *precision range* of the stated value,
and **inaccurate** otherwise.  For an *approximately stated* value,
the *accuracy* is relative: the further the stated value is from the
true value, the less *accurate* or more *inaccurate* the stated value. 

{.note}  The *precision* of a value is unrelated to its *accuracy*.  A
value may be *precise* or *imprecise* independently of whether it is
*accurate* or *inaccurate*.  

{.example ...}  The following table gives example *instants* of birth
for Queen Victoria which are variously *precise* or *imprecise*, and
*accurate* or *inaccurate*. 

-----------  -----------   -----------------------
Precise      Accurate      24 May 1819 at 4am
Precise      Inaccurate    19 Jun 1833 at 9pm
Imprecise    Accurate      During the 1810s
Imprecise    Inaccurate    During the 1790s
-----------  -----------   -----------------------

It is generally accepted that Queen Victoria was in fact born at 4.15am
on 24 May 1819.
{/}

{.note}  In principle, the *accuracy* of any stated value is unknowable,
though in practice some facts are so well established they can be
regarded as proven for all practical purposes as the alternative would
require there to have been a vast conspiracy.  Much of the time the
situation is not so clear.

The likelihood that a stated value is *accurate* is referred to as its
**reliability**.

{.note}  Although this is in theory a probability, *reliabilities* are
usually described comparatively or quantitatively.  A researcher may
gauge the *reliability* of a stated value by considering the reliability
of the sources in which it is stated, and the corroborating or
contradicting evidence.  Different researchers might reasonably reach
different conclusions on the *reliability* of a stated value.

{.note} A stated value can be considered *unreliable* by virtue of being
stated with excessive *precision*.  

{.example ...}  Suppose a man was last seen on 1 January and his corpse
found on 31 January.  The coroner determined the man had been dead for
one to two weeks when found, but that no more *precise* date of death
could be established.  A newspaper obituary simply said he died in
January, but a gravestone was erected giving his date of death as 21
January.  A researcher might conclude the bare month given in the
obituary is *reliable* because the relatively *imprecise* *date* is very
likely *accurate* as it is consistent with the other evidence.  The
gravestone might be *accurate*, and it is not directly contradicted by
the other evidence, but if the researcher believes the *date* "21
January" was made up, perhaps so that something could be put on the
grave, it might be judged *unreliable* as there is a high likelihood
that the true *instant* of death was not actually on 21 January.

This is not an example of *inherent ambiguity*.  Depending on the
circumstances of the death, there may have been a few minutes of
*inherent ambiguity* as the man's life slowly ebbed away, but the bulk
of the uncertainty is from lack of knowledge of what happened and when.
{/}

### Date concepts in other formats

{.ednote}  This whole section may vanish in a future draft.

The *datatypes* defined in this standard are *not recommended* for use in
serialisation formats other than with ELF.

{.ednote ...} In due course we need to decide FHISO's preferred way of
handling *dates* and *durations* in other serialisation formats.  GEDCOM
X, for example, uses a format more closely aligned with [ISO 8601], and
in early discussion on *dates* and in our call for paper submissions, we
were erring in that direction too.  

If we have one *date* format for ELF, another for GEDCOM X, and
possibly even a third one for a future format of our own, we will
probably want to make sure we don't end up with *dates* formatted for
GEDCOM X appearing in ELF, or vice versa, otherwise an ELF application
will need to know about every *date* format rather than just the ELF
*date* formats.  At some level, this requires converting *dates* between
formats when data is transferred between systems.  For data in the [ELF
Data Model] or in the GEDCOM X data model, this is no problem as a data
conversion stage will be required when converting between data models,
and it can convert the *date* formats too.

A problem arises in FHISO's component standards, such as [CEV Concepts],
which are intended to be usable in ELF, GEDCOM X and other data models.
An ELF application will not necessarily know about CEV and will then see
the CEV *structures* as unknown extensions, so there needs to some way of
indicating that the ELF structure it is reading contains a *date*.
This could be done by requiring an ELF schema to be present and have it
specify the datatype for the payload, though that might be too onerous
a requirement.  Another option is to require a specific tag like `DATE`
to be used, and special case this.  The same issue may exist for *ages*
too, but it is not general to all *datatypes* &mdash; just those which
have to be formatted differently in different serialisations, which will
hopefully be a minority of *datatypes*.
{/}

## Date formats                                                 {#dates}

ELF uses three different *datatypes* to represent *dates*, depending on
the context.

* `elf:DateValue` is used for historical *dates*, and is defined in
  {§DateValue}.
* `elf:DatePeriod` is used to record the period of coverage a source, and
  is defined in {§DatePeriod}.
* `elf:DateExact` is used to record the creation or modification *date* 
  of various objects in the data model, and is defined in {§DateExact}.

As the first two of these *datatypes* are used to record historical
*dates*, and ELF allows historical *dates* to be expressed using many
different *calendars*, these two *datatypes* each allow *dates* in
arbitrary *calendars*.  This is achieved by providing a generic *date*
syntax which all *dates* *must* match, regardless of *calendar*, and
which begins with a *calendar escape* indicating the specific *calendar*
in use.  This generic syntax is defined in {§generic}, and extensions to
it to support imprecisely known dates and dates written in natural
language are given in {§modifiers}.

{.ednote ...} An earlier draft of this standard used a separate
*datatype* for each *calendar*, and [ELF Serialisation] used
`@#D`&hellip;`@` as a way of tagging the *datatype*.  This approach was
eventually abandoned because it could not cope with *date ranges* and
*date periods* where the two end points used different *calendars*.
[GEDCOM 5.5.1] permits this, and although many applications do not
support it, the TSC considered the following use case to be important
enough that ELF needed to support it too:

    0 INDI
    1 NAME George II
    1 TITL King of Great Britain
    2 DATE FROM @#DJULIAN@ 11 JUN 1727 TO @#DGREGORIAN@ 25 OCT 1760

Were there *datatype* per *calendar*, what should the *datatype* of
the above `DATE` element's payload be?  It's neither wholly Julian nor
wholly Gregorian.  Because of the difficulties with such constructs, we
dropped the idea of making each *calendar* a separate *datatype*.

One option for solving this which the TSC seriously considered is to
introduce **compound calendars**, along the lines of the proposal in
[CFPS 38](https://tech.fhiso.org/cfps/files/cfps38.pdf), but this adds
complexity due to the need to add a mechanism for defining *compound
calendars*.

A separate complication comes from the fact that `elf:DateValue`
and `elf:DatePeriod` are separate *datatypes*, and *calendar*-specific
*subtypes* of each would likely be required.  This could be solved by
removing periods from the data model entirely, perhaps by having the
serialisation layer split up `DATE` tags containing a period.  This may
make sense at a date model level too, if we model periods as two
implicit events: one intiating and one concluding the period being
discussed.  There is less of a case for doing the same wtih ranges, so a
solution to the problem of ranges with multiple calendars would still be
required.

The TSC believe an approach along these lines could be made to work, but
it would be too big a change to include in ELF 1.0.  We also feel we
should investigate alternative approaches before committing to a
specific solution.  Deferring this functionality until a future version
of ELF will give us time to do give suitable consideration to the
options available.
{/}

### Generic date syntax                                       {#generic}

A *date* is represented in the generic *date* syntax as a sequence of five
components: a *calendar escape*, followed by encodings of the *calendar
day*, *calendar month*, *calendar year* and *epoch name*.  Only the
*calendar year* is *required*; the other components are *optional*,
except that the *calendar day* cannot be present if the *calendar month*
has been omitted.  It matches the `Date` production.

    Date   ::= (CalEsc S)? ((Day S)? Month S)? Year (S? Epoch)?

    CalEsc ::= "@#D" [A-Z] [A-Z ]* "@"
    Day    ::= [0-9]+
    Month  ::= [A-Z] [A-Z0-9] [A-Z0-9]+
    Year   ::= "-"? [0-9]+ ( "/" "-"? [0-9]+ )?
    Epoch  ::= [A-Z] ( [A-Z] | [A-Z0-9._]* [._] [A-Z0-9._]* ) 
               | "$" [^ #x9#xA#xD]+

{.example ...}  The following are examples of *dates* which match the
`Date` production:

    63 B.C.
    21 JAN 1793
    @#DJULIAN@ 29 MAY 1453

The first of these includes only a *calendar year* and *epoch name*.  The
following two both have a *calendar day*, *calendar month* and *calendar
year*, and neither specifies an *epoch name*.  Only the third *date*
includes a *calendar escape*.
{/}

{.note}  The `Month` and `Epoch` productions are more complex than might
at first seem necessary to ensure that no *string* can match both
productions.  This ensures a *string* containing just a *day* and a
*month*, such as "`1 JAN`", cannot match the `Date` production.  A
future version of ELF might allow the year to be omitted in *dates*
where it is unknown.

A *conformant* application serialising a *date* using this syntax
*should* use a single space *character* (U+0020) wherever *whitespace*
is permitted in the `Date` production.

{.note}  [GEDCOM 5.5.1] under-specifies how *whitespace* is allowed in
*dates*.  The `Date` production is somewhat permissive in its treatment of
*whitespace*, though does not allow it to be omitted entirely.  The
preceding recommendation ensures that *conformant* ELF applications will
be maximally compliant with current GEDCOM application which typically
use a single space *character*.

#### Calendar escapes                                     {#cal-escapes}

The `CaleEsc` production encodes the **calendar escape**, which
identifies the particular *calendar* being used in the *date*.

{.note}  Syntactically, the *calendar escape* is an ELF escape, as
defined §XX of [ELF Serialisation].  When such escapes occur in the
payload of a `DATE` line, they are passed through to the data model
unaltered.

{.ednote}  Check the above is accurate once [ELF Serialisation] has been
updated, and update the reference.  Note that this means historical
dates *must* appear on `DATE` lines.

The following *calendar escapes* are defined in {§calendars} of this
standard.

----------------    -------------------------------------------------
`@#DGREGORIAN@`     The Gregorian *calendar* defined in {§gregorian}
`@#DJULIAN@`        The Julian *calendar* defined in {§julian}
`@#DFRENCH R@`      The French Republican *calendar* defined in {§french}
`@#DHEBREW@`        The Hebrew *calendar* defined in {§hebrew}
----------------    -------------------------------------------------

{.note} The *calendar escape* for the French Republican *calendar*
contains exactly one space *character* (U+0020).  It *must not* be
written with any alternative form of *whitespace*.

{.ednote}  An earlier draft of this standard included `@#FRENCHR@`
(without a space) as an alias for `@#DFRENCH R@`, but we made no record
of the use case that lead to its inclusion and have removed it again.

{.note}  [GEDCOM 5.5.1] includes one further *calendar escape*,
`@#DROMAN@`, which it reserved for future use, presumably for use with
Roman Republican *calendar*.  This standard does not reserve this
*calendar escape*.

{.ednote ...}  Should we standardise a basic Roman calendar using the
*calendar escape* `@#DROMAN@`?  The lengths of the months would be left
unspecified, for the simple reason that they are not always known, though
we might safely limit the *calendar day* to being a two digit number.
It would probably use the twelve *month names* of the Gregorian
calendar, including `JUL` and `AUG`, despite them being called Quintilis
and Sextilis at the time.   We would need a *month name* for
Intercalaris, the intercalary month inserted in or after February.  As
`INT` risks conflicting with the *date modifier* for *interpreted
dates*, `MER` might be best as Intercalaris was also called Mercedonius.
We would also need *month names* for Intercalaris Prior and Intercalaris
Posterior, the two exceptional inserted in 46&nbsp;BC to realign the
calendar with the equinoxes in preparation for the introduction of
the Julian calendar.  `IC1` and `IC2` would work.  The `A.D.` and `B.C.`
*epoch names* would be supported.  `A.U.C.` (for *ab urbe condita* –
since the founding of Rome) would need careful consideration.

The need for this calendar arises surprisingly often.  Pompey, the 
famous Roman general, was born on 29 September 106&nbsp;BC, as reckoned
in the Roman calendar, but this date cannot be converted into the
proleptic Julian or Gregorian calendar with certainty because the
precise lengths of the years around this time are not known.  A
comprehensive discussion of this can be found in [Roman Dates].
Even though no genealogies back to Roman times can currently be proved,
they are commonly encountered, and the fact that a genealogy cannot be
proved does not necessarily mean it is not useful to record it, perhaps
for the purpose of critical review.
{/}

The `@#DUNKNOWN@` *calendar escape* is permanently reserved.  Third
parties *must not* define calendars with this name and applications
*should not* generate *dates* using this *calendar escape*, however
*conformant* applications *must not* discard *dates* using this
*calendar escape*.  *Conformant* applications *must not* assume that two
dates with a `@#DUNKNOWN@` *calendar escape*, whether explicitly written
or inferred as described below, are expressed in the same *calendar*.

{.example}  The generic *date* syntax puts sufficient constraints on how
*calendars* can be represented that applications *may* make certain
assumption about *dates* written in unknown *calendars*, for example
that `@#DISLAMIC@ 1 RAJ 1420` is an earlier date than `@#DISLAMIC@ 9 RAM
1422` if both are *well-formed* *dates*.  This is because year numbers
*must* increase with time.  *Conformant* applications *must not* make
similar assumptions for two *dates* with the `@#DUNKNOWN@` *calendar
escape* as they might not be represented using the same *calendar*.

{.note}  It is the intention of FHISO to allow third parties to define
their own *calendar escapes* in order to support additional *calendars*.
However this version of ELF provides no means of avoiding conflict
between separate third-party *calendar escapes*.  This is particularly
problematic when there a several variants of a calendar, and if
different vendors choose to implement a different variant using the same
*calendar escape*.  FHISO intend to introduce a mechanism to avoid such
conflicts in a future version of ELF.  This is likely to work by
assigning a *term* to each *calendar*, and a syntax for binding
*calendar escapes* to *term name* IRIs.

{.ednote ...}  This functionality was dropped from ELF 1.0 because the
specification proved more complicated than expected.  The intention is
to add *calendar* bindings to the ELF schema, such as this:

    1 SCHMA
    2 PRFX elf https://terms.fhiso.org/elf/
    2 IRI elf:JulianCalendar
    3 DTYPE JULIAN

Because *dates* are likely to copied around, once in the data model the
*date* needs to reference the *calendar* *term name* rather than the
*calendar escape*.  This means the serialisation layer needs to convert
*calendar escapes* to *term names*, and vice versa.  Finding a clean
way of doing this proved problematic.

The TSC had been considering making *calendars* a specific sort of
*datatype*, and then have the serialisation layer treat the *calendar
escape* as way of tagging the *datatype* of the `DATE` tag's payload.
However, as noted in an earlier editorial note, this caused problems
with *date periods* and *date ranges* which used multiple *calendars*,
and has been deferred to a future version of ELF.  
{/}

This generic *date* syntax defines only some basic syntactic constraints
on the representation of the *calendar day*, *calendar month*, *calendar
year* and *epoch name* components.  The party defining each *calendar*
*should* define further constraints on these components to define what
constitutes a **well-formed** *date* in that *calendar*.  Where possible,
the set of *well-formed* *dates* *should* be the same as the set of *dates*
that actually existed.

{.example}  The *date* "`12 AUGUST 2000`" is not a *well-formed* *date* in
the Gregorian calendar, as defined in {§gregorian}, because the
specified month, "`AUGUST`", is not one of the twelve allowed months
names: it ought to have been written "`12 AUG 2000`".

{.example}  The *date* "`29 FEB 1973`" is not a *well-formed* *date* in
the Gregorian calendar, because February 1973 only had 28 days.

{.note} This standard does not prohibit *calendars* from defining *dates*
which never occurred to be *well-formed*, though this is generally *not
recommended*.  It is allowed to accommodate *calendars* where the exact
sequence of *dates* is either unknown or cannot be determined
algorithmically.  

{.example}  Certain versions of the Islamic *calendar* define the start
of each *calendar month* by when the new moon is actually observed.
This results in unpredictable month lengths.  If such a *calendar* were
defined for use in ELF, it would likely regard days beyond the expected
end of the month as *well-formed* *dates* to accommodate the possibility
that bad weather had prevented the new moon from being observed.

All *dates* written using a *calendar escape* with which the application
is not familiar are assumed to be *well-formed*.  This includes all
*dates* using the `@#DUNKNOWN@` *calendar escape*.

*Conformant* applications *must not* generate *dates* which are known
not to be *well-formed*.  Applications encountering *dates* which are
known not to be *well-formed* *may* delete the *date* or signal an error
to the user.  If an application cannot determine whether or not a *date*
is *well-formed*, it *must* assume it is *well-formed*.

{.note}  Other than for *dates* written in the Gregorian *calendar*, no
part of this standard requires an application to be able to determine
whether a *date* is *well-formed*.  In some *calendars*, such as the
Hebrew *calendar* defined in {§hebrew}, the rules for determining
this are fairly complex.  Applications are encouraged to implement these
rules in full, but are not required to.

The *calendar escape* is *optional* in the generic *date* syntax.  If the
*calendar escape* is omitted and if the *date* if *well-formed* in the
Gregorian *calendar*, then the *date* is treated as if it used the
`@#DGREGORIAN@` *calendar escape*.  If the *calendar escape* is
otherwise omitted, the *date* is treated as if it used the `@#DUNKNOWN@`
*calendar escape*.

{.note}  [GEDCOM 5.5.1] simply says that *dates* written without a
*calendar escape* default to the Gregorian calendar.  ELF's approach is
more nuanced.  If a *date* explicitly uses the Gregorian
*calendar escape* then an invalid *date* *may* be deleted; if it is
written without a *calendar escape* then it *must not* be, assuming it
conforms to the generic *date* syntax.  ELF deviates from [GEDCOM 5.5.1]
in this regard because many current applications fail to include a
*calendar escape* when the Julian *calendar* is used.  As a result,
*dates* like "`29 FEB 1700`" can be found written without a *calendar
escape*.  This date did not exist in the Gregorian calendar and
is not a *well-formed date* in that *calendar*, however this rule
prevents applications from deleting it as invalid.

It is *recommended* that, where possible, dates should be entered in ELF
datasets using the calendar in which they were written in the source.

{.example}  A contemporary record of an event occurring in seventeenth
century Massachusetts would almost certainly be recoded using the Julian
calendar, as Massachusetts, like all the British colonies, did not adopt
the Gregorian calendar until 1752.  The *date* of this event *should*
therefore be recorded in ELF using the Julian calendar and not converted
to the Gregorian calendar.

#### Days

The `Day` production encodes the *calendar day* component of the *date*.
It is an positive integer which *calendars* *should* use to count
how many *calendar days* into the *calendar month* the specified
*calendar day* is, with the first *calendar day* being "`1`".
Leading zeros preceding a non-zero digit are permitted; *conformant*
applications *must* attach no significance to them and *may* remove
them.

{.ednote}  An earlier draft of this standard allowed non-integer
*calendar day* components, providing the first *character* was a decimal
digit.  The motivation for allowing this came from consideration
of Roman day reckoning.  In this system, days are reckoned backwards
from three fixed points in each month, called the kalends, nones and
ides.  For example, the day described as "ante diem quintum kalendas
Septembres" or "a.d. V Kal.  Sept", meaning five days before the kalends
of September (1 Sept), counting inclusively, is 28 August.  If this were
considered a separate *calendar* and non-integer *calendar day*
components allowed, the day could be represented as "`5K SEP`".  However
on balance it was felt this was an unnecessary complication and the
facility was removed.  The framework is still flexible enough to handle
Roman day reckoning by using separate *calendar month* components for
the kalends, nones and ides, thus giving 28 August a representation
similar to "`5 KSEP`".

{.ednote}  Should there be a requirement that days numbers increase
monotonically?  Roman day reckoning, which counts days backwards, can
still be supported if negative day numbers are allowed: e.g. "`-5
KSEP`".  This has the advantage of allowing applications to sort
*calendar days* without knowing the calendar, and all that would be
required to sort days completely would be to know the order of *month
names* and *epoch names*.

#### Months

The `Month` production encodes the *calendar month* component of the
*date*.  The set of permitted *calendar month* components in a given
*calendar* is called the set of **month names** for the *calendar*. 
*Month names* *should* normally be abbreviated forms of their common
names, and *must* be at least three *characters* long.

{.example}  The French Republican *calendar* has twelve months named
Vendémiaire, Brumaire, Frimaire, Nivôse, Pluviôse, Ventôse, Germinal,
Floréal, Prairial, Messidor, Thermidor and Fructidor.  In ELF, as
described in {§french}, these are abbreviated `VEND`, `BRUM`, `FRIM`,
`NIVO`, `PLUV`, `VENT`, `GERM`, `FLOR`, `PRAI`, `MESS`, `THER` and
`FRUC`.  In addition, each year had five or six consecutive intercalary
days, or jours complémentaires, which were not part of any month.  For
the purposes of representing this calendar in ELF, the intercalary days
are considered a thirteenth month, `COMP`.

{.note} *Month names* are always upper-case, a constraint guaranteed by
the `Month` production.  Lower-case, mixed-case, or non-ASCII *month
names* *must not* be used.

{.note}  *Month names* are *required* to be at least three *characters*
long to avoid conflicting with *epoch names*.

The following words are reserved and *must not* be used as *month
names* in any calendar: `ABT`, `AFT`, `AND`, `BCE`, `BEF`, `BET`, `CAL`,
`EST`, `EVERY`, `FOR`, `FROM`, `INT`, `POS`, `REP`, `TIME`, `UNCERT`,
`UNK` and `ZONE`.

{.note}  Many of these words have specific meanings in the ELF *date*
*datatypes*.  The words `EVERY`, `FOR`, `POS`, `REP`, `TIME`, `UNCERT`,
`UNK` and `ZONE` are reserved for possible future use because they
describe concepts in [GEDCOM X Dates] or [ISO 8601-2] which are
not currently in ELF.  This does not necessarily mean FHISO will add
such functionality to a future version of ELF.

#### Years

The `Year` production encodes the *calendar year* component of the
*date*.  The *string* matching this production *shall* be an 
integer, and *may* be followed by a solidus (U+002F) and another
integer.  Either integer *may* begin with a minus sign (U+002D).

{.note}  Negative years and the year zero are supported by this generic
*date* syntax, but not by any *calendar* defined in this standard.  The
intention is that they provide a way of representing a *dates* before
the *epoch* of a particular *calendar* where no *reverse epoch name* has
been defined.  This is not expected to be common with real *calendars*.

{.ednote}  One specific example where it might occur is if a future
version of ELF defines a *calendar* to represent Julian days, for use in
defining *epochs*.  The *epoch* for the Julian day is in the Gregorian
year 4714&nbsp;BC, but some other *calendars*, such as the Byzantine
calendar, have earlier *epochs* meaning their *epoch* occurs on a
negative Julian day.

When the *calendar year* component contains no solidus and second
integer value, the integer given is the *logical year* number.  A
*conformant* application *must* attach no significance to its particular
lexical form, and *may* add or remove leading zeros preceding a non-zero
digit.

A *calendar year* component with two integers is called a **dual year**,
and is used when the historical and modern reckoning of years differ.
The first integer in a *dual year* is the *historical year*; the second
integer is the *logical year* which *may* be given in abbreviated form.

{.example}  The principal use of *dual years* is to encode *dates* which
were recorded using years beginning on 25 March, as was the practice in
many parts of the world in mediæval and early modern times.  Charles I's
execution occurred on 30 January in the *logical year* 1649, but the
*historical year* 1648.  To avoid ambiguity, the year can be written
1648/1649.  ELF supports this and allows the *date* to be recorded as
“`30 JAN 1648/1649`”.  In this case the *logical year* is not
abbreviated.

The *dual year* syntax is only used when there are genuine differences
in the conventional reckoning of years.  *Dual years* *should* be used
during periods when use of a *historical year* differing from the
*logical year* was common, even if the source in question did not use
the *historical year*.  This is to remove any potential ambiguity.

{.example} The *date* of Charles I's execution *should not* be written
"`30 JAN 1649`", even though this is technically correct as 1649 is the
*logical year*, as reckoned with 1 January as the start of the new year.
This is true even if the *date* was quoted from a modern book which
wrote it using the *logical year*.  The form "`30 JAN 1648/1649`" avoids
any possible ambiguity over which new year was being used.

*Dual years* *must not* be used simply to record an error in the year as
stated in a source. 

{.example}  If a parish register includes a baptism entry dated 12 Jan
1842, but the context and other circumstantial evidence makes it clear
that the year was incorrectly written in the register and was in fact
1845, this *must not* be recorded in ELF as "`12 JAN 1842/1845`".

When serialising a *date*, a *dual year* *must* be used if the
*historical year* and *logical year* differ, and *must not* be used if
they are equal.  

When serialising a *dual year*, applications *may* abbreviate the
*logical year* to just the last two digits if the difference between the
*historical year* and the *logical year* is less than 10 years, or *may*
abbreviate it to just the last one digit if the difference between the
*historical year* and the *logical year* is no more than 1 year.  If
the *historical year* and the *logical year* differ by 10 or more years,
abbreviated form *must not* be used.  When the *logical year* is
abbreviated, any minus sign is dropped in the abbreviated form.  Where
possible, *logical years* *should* be abbreviated to two digits.

{.example}  The *date* of Charles I's execution *may* be written in
abbreviated form as "`30 JAN 1648/49`" or as "`30 JAN 1648/9`".  The
former is *recommended* as this is compatible with the [GEDCOM 5.5.1]
standard, though both forms can be found in current GEDCOM files, as can
the unabbreviated form.

{.example}  Abbreviated form *must not* be used if *dual years* are
being used in the Byzantine *calendar* to express years using standard
Byzantine *epoch* and the Alexandrian *epoch*.  This is because the
*historical year* and *logical year* will differ by 16 or 17 years,
depending on the specific *date*.

A specific *calendar* *should* normally place further restrictions on
how *dual years* can be used, and any *dates* using *dual years* which
fail to conform to any such *calendar*-specific restrictions are not
*well-formed* *dates*.

{.note}  This is necessary if applications are to have understanding of
what the *historical date* means.  A *date* of "`@#DJULIAN@ 1740/1620`"
is perfectly well-defined insofar that it represents the Julian year
A.D.&nbsp;1620 and which for some reason was conventionally recorded as
1740 at the time, but without an understanding of why this was done, it
is difficult for an application to know what to do with this
information.  In fact, the Julian calendar defined in {§julian} only
allows *dual years* when the *historical date* and *logical date* differ
by exactly one year.  "`@#DJULIAN@ 1740/1620`" is not therefore
a *well-formed date*.

*Calendars* *must not* place further restrictions on when the
abbreviated format can be used.

{.note}  This is because abbreviated form is considered part of the
generic *date* syntax, and not specific to any *calendar*.  It is
intended that applications can parse *dual years* to extract the
*historical date* and *logical date* even in unknown *calendars*.

{.note ...}  [GEDCOM 5.5.1] includes support for *dual years*, though
only with *dates* in the Gregorian *calendar*.  This is unfortunate as
*dual years* are principally used with *dates* in the Julian *calendar*,
and the example given in [GEDCOM 5.5.1] is seemingly in the Julian
*calendar*.  Nevertheless, many applications do implement *dual year*
support.  In [GEDCOM 5.5.1], *dual years* *must* be written in
abbreviated form with the *logical year* shortened to two years.  ELF
relaxes this restriction as *dual years* are commonly found
unabbreviated or with a single-digit *logical date*.

*Dual years* in [GEDCOM 5.5.1] were probably only intended for years
beginning on Lady Day, though the standard is not quite explicit in
saying so; however the same facility readily accommodates years
beginning on arbitrary days, and some current applications implement
this.  ELF generalises this further by allowing the *historical year*
and *logical year* to differ arbitrarily in the generic *date* syntax,
though of the *calendars* currently defined, only the Julian *calendar*
allows *dual years*, and then only when the *historical year* and
*logical year* differ by exactly one year.
{/}

When parsing a *dual year*, a *conformant* application *must* treat the
second integer as an abbreviated *logical year* if it could have been
produced by the serialisation rule for abbreviated *logical years*,
above, and otherwise *must not*.

{.example}  The *dual year* "`1616/8`" is not in abbreviated form
because there is no *logical year* number ending in 8 which is at most
one year away from the *historical year* 1616.  This is therefore
considered an unabbreviated *dual year*, representing the *historical
year* 1618 and the *logical year* 8.  Very probably this will result in
the *date* not being *well-formed* in the applicable *calendar*, in which
case the application *may* reject it.

*Conformant* applications *may* alter the lexical form of a *dual year*
in any way, providing the *logical year* and *historical year* it
represents is unchanged, and *must not* attach any significance to its
particular lexical form.

{.note}  This allows applications to store the *calendar year* component
of the *date* as two integers internally, and regenerate its lexical form
upon serialisation.

The *calendar* *may* define further restrictions on the range of
integers permitted as *logical years*.  Any such restrictions apply
regardless of whether *dual years* are in used.

#### Epochs

The `Epoch` production encodes the *epoch name* component of the *date*,
which specifies both the particular *epoch* from which *calendar years*
are numbered and the direction of the numbering.  Each *calendar*
specifies the set of permitted *epoch names* components for that
*calendar*.

{.example}  The Julian *calendar* defined in {§julian} includes the
*epoch names* "`B.C.`" and "`A.D.`", standing for Before Christ and Anno
Domini, respectively.  Both *epoch names* state that *calendar years*
are counted from an *epoch* on the Julian date 1 January A.D.&nbsp;1,
nominally the date for the birth of Jesus Christ, but for "`B.C.`"
*calendar years* are counted backwards from that *epoch*, while for
"`A.D.`" *calendar years* are counted forwards.

{.note}  The *epoch name* always comes after the *calendar year*
component in the generic *date* syntax, despite certain *epoch names*
being conventionally written before the *logical year* number in
English.  For example, it is normal to write "AD 1752" in English, but
the ELF representation is "`1752 A.D.`".  A *conformant* application
*must not* accept "`A.D. 1752`" as a valid *date*, as it does not match
the `Date` production.

The `Epoch` production requires *epoch names* either to be exactly two
*characters* long, or to include at least one full stop (U+002E) or
underscore (U+005F), or to begin with a dollar sign (U+0024).

{.note}  This ensure that no *month name* is syntactically allowed as an
*epoch name*, or vice versa.  This ensures that a *string* like 
"`1 JAN`" cannot match the `Date` production.  

*Epoch names* *should* normally be an acronym or initialism with full
stops between letters.  The two-letter form of *epoch names*, without a
full stop, underscore or leading dollar, is deprecated.  If an
application encounters such a *epoch name*, it *should* convert it into
an initialism by inserting a full stop between the two letters and
another after the second letter.

{.note} Two-letter *epoch names* without full stops are allowed in ELF
because "`BC`" is moderately frequently found in current GEDCOM files,
even though [GEDCOM 5.5.1] requires it to be spelled "`B.C.`".  This
rule converts "`BC`" to "`B.C.`".

*Epoch names* beginning with a dollar sign are reserved for future use.
*Conformant* applications *must* accept them, but *calendars* *must not*
define any such *epoch names*.

{.ednote}  This specification of *epoch names* is designed to be usable
to implement regnal years.  In such a scheme, the *instant* of
accession of each monarch would be an *epoch*, and a *forwards epoch
name* would be used to reference it, for example "`25 OCT 3 HENRY_V`".
However to accommodate monarchs with a single name and no regnal number
(e.g. Victoria or Tutankhamun), as well as to allow monarch names in
foreign scripts, the dollar sign is reserved as a possible sigil for
epoch names.  This would allow "`$昭和`", for example, to represent the
*epoch* at the start of the Shōwa period in Japan.

The words "`TO`" and "`AT`" are reserved and *must not* be used as
*epoch names* in any *calendar*.

{.note}  The word "`AT`" is included here for future compatibility; the
word "`TO`" is reserved because it is used in *date periods* in
{§DatePeriod}.

{.ednote ...}  An earlier draft of this standard included the following
paragraph:

> If a *calendar* defines multiple *epoch names* for the same *epoch*,
> and which are either all *forwards epoch names* or all *reverse epoch
> names*, applications *should* treat those *epoch names* as
> interchangeable.

This was added to allow the Julian and Gregorian *calendars* to define
"`B.C.E.`" as an alias for "`B.C.`", however the current draft does
not do that, and it seems an unnecessary complication.  If the BCE form
is added, this paragraph needs reinstating.
{/}

A *calendar* *may* require an *epoch name* to be present, *may* allow it
to be omitted, and *may* define no *epoch names* thereby requiring it to
be omitted.  In calendars where the *epoch name* is *optional*, the
*calendar* *should* define an explicit *epoch name* that is equivalent
to an omitted *epoch name*.  This *epoch name* is called the **default
epoch name** for the calendar.

{.example}  The Julian calendar defined in {§julian} provides the
"`A.D.`" *epoch name* to serve as its *default epoch name*.

{.ednote}  The French Republican calendar, as currently defined in
{§french}, does not properly define an *epoch name*, or equivalently
leaves its sole *epoch name* anonymous.  This is allowed, but is *not
recommended*.  If the French Republican *epoch name* remains anonymous,
the above text should perhaps be changed.

### Date modifiers                                          {#modifiers}

The generic *date* syntax described in {§generic} provides a means of
specifying a particular *date*, but does not provide a way of describing
*dates* which are *approxiately stated*, nor of giving natural language
descriptions, nor of stating a *imprecise* *date* via its *precision
range*.  ELF provides several extensions to the generic *date* syntax to
provide this functionality.  Syntactically, these are expressed by
prefixing the generic *date* syntax with a token called **date
modifier**.

{.example}  An "`ABT`" *date modifier* is introduced in {§approx}.  It
is placed before the *date*, as in "`ABT JAN 1901`".  

{.ednote}  This draft, like [GECOM 5.5.1], does not allow more than one
of these facilities to be used on the same *date*.  It seems potentially
useful to remove this restriction, for example by allowing "`FROM ABT
1798 TO 2 JAN 1842`".  There would be no ambiguity in the grammar with
such constructs and their meaning would generally be well defined.
Backwards compatibility could be handled by saying that applications
*should not* produce such constructs but *must* be able to read them.
This would also allow constructs such as "`EST ABT 1881`", which the
GEDCOM grammar does not allow but which appears as an example in [GEDCOM
5.5.1], albeit as an example of an unnecessary circumlocution.
Should the initial version of ELF support such things?

#### Approximated dates                                        {#approx}

A *date* *may* be preceded by one of the tokens `ABT`, `CAL` or `EST`,
as shown in the following `DateApprox` production:

    DateApprox  ::= ( "ABT" | "CAL" | "EST" ) S Date

The `ABT` token indicates that the *date* is *approximately stated*, and
that its *precision* is lower than would have been the case without the
`ABT` token.  It is typically used when there is evidence that the
*date* given is roughly correct, and *should not* be used when the
*date* is estimated using statistical likelihoods or cultural norms.

{.example}  If it is known that the first and third children in a family
were born in 1897 and 1900, respectively, the second child's birth *may*
be recorded as "`ABT 1899`" as the *date* of birth is fairly well
bounded, even if twins were involved.  

{.note}  The `ABT` token is currently by far the most commonly used of
the three approximated tokens.

The `EST` token also indicates that *date* is *approximately stated*,
and is an estimate perhaps based only on statistical likelihoods or
cultural norms.  An application *may* assume a *date* written with the
`EST` token has lower *precision* than one with the `ABT` token.

{.example}  If it is known that the first three children in a family of
four were born between 1897 and 1900, a researcher might conclude that
it is probable that next child was born shortly afterwards and estimate
the *date* of birth as "`EST 1903`".  The `ABT` token *should not* be used
in this case, unless there is additional evidence that the fourth child
was not very much younger.

{.example}  It can sometimes be useful to provide a crude estimate of
an individual's *date* of birth.  If a baptism register records a
baptism in 1692 and gives the father's name, a researcher might wish to
record an estimate of the father's *date* of birth, perhaps to help
disambiguate him from other people of the same name.  If such an
estimate is to recorded, it should use the `EST` token, for example,
"`EST 1660`".

The `CAL` token is used to record a *date* that is not directly stated
in a source, but instead has been calculated from other known values,
typically another *date* and the *duration* separating the two *dates*.
An application *may* assume a *date* written with the `CAL` token has a
similar or higher *precision* than one written with the `ABT` token.

{.example}  If a newspaper reports on a golden wedding celebration in
the summer of 1948, this is evidence that the wedding happened 50 years
previously, and the date of the marriage *may* be entered as "`CAL
1898`".

When a *date* is calculated from another *date* and an *imprecise*
*duration* separating them, use of the `ABT` token is *recommended*
instead of the `CAL` token. 

{.example}  Like many censuses, the 1880 census of Iceland records
individuals' *ages* on their most recent birthday.  A person recorded as
72 could have been born in 1807 or 1808.  Because the *age* has been
rounded down and is therefore somewhat *imprecise*, it is *recommended*
that the *date* of birth be recorded as "`ABT 1808`" rather than "`CAL
1808`".

{.note}  A `CAL` token might sometimes be an indicator that the *date*
is of lower *reliability* than one without this token, everything else
being equal, due to it not being directly stated.

{.ednote}  Should FHISO deprecate the `CAL` token and allow uses of it
to be replaced with `ABT`?  It's not clear it adds anything useful.

#### Date phrases and interpreted dates                  {#date-phrases}

ELF allows *dates* to be recorded in natural language.  The natural
language description of a *date* is called a **date phrases** and is
written between parentheses (U+0028 and U+0029).

    DateInterp  ::= ( "INT" S Date S )? "(" DatePhrase ")"
    DatePhrase  ::= [^#xA#xD()]*

The *date phrase* is an arbitrary *language-tagged* *string* except that
it *must not* contain parentheses (U+0028 or U+0029), line feeds
(U+000A) or carriage returns (U+000D).

{.note}  [GEDCOM 5.5.1] only requires that *date phrases* be "enclosed
in matching parentheses", which could be interpreted as requiring that any
parentheses in the *date phrase* be balanced.  ELF goes further and
prohibits parentheses from occurring in *date phrases* at all.

{.ednote}  The prohibition on these *characters* is not strictly needed,
at least while the grammar does not allow *date phrases* within *date
ranges* or *date periods*, though that is a possible extension which
might be made in a future version of ELF.  A data model layer escape
mechanism along the lines of the `%{`&hellip;`}` syntax used in FHISO's
draft Creator's Name microformat could allow arbitrary *characters* to
appear in it.

A *date phrase* *should* be a fragment of text quoted from a source,
possibly in translation, and *should* only normally be used if the text
cannot readily be converted into a *date*, or where that conversion
would lose useful information.  *Date phrases* *should not* be used for
arbitrary annotations or commentary, and *must not* be used in a
negative sense to say the event did not occur.

{.example}  If a source describes an event as happening on "The Feast of
St John" in a particular year, this might be recorded in a *date phrase*
if there was insufficient context to establish whether it referred to
the Feast of Nativity of St John the Baptist on 24 June, or the Feast of
St John the Evangelist on 27 December.

{.note}  Historically, some applications have used a *date phrase* like
"Not married" to indicate a marriage did not occur.  Such usage is
prohibited in ELF and was not allowed in [GEDCOM 5.5.1].  *Conformant*
applications are permitted to assume a *date phrase* describes an actual
*date*, even if the *date phrase* cannot be interpreted.  Fortunately,
uses like "Not married" is largely confined to [GEDCOM 5.3] and earlier
which omitted the parentheses around *date phrases*.  *Date phrases*
written without parentheses will not normally match the generic *date*
syntax, and will therefore not be parsed as *dates* in ELF.

The *date phrase* *may* be accompanied by a *date* in the generic *date*
syntax preceded by the `INT` token.   The combination is called
an **interpreted date** and its *date* *should* be an interpretation
of the associated *date phrase* in the context of source containing it.

{.example}  "`INT @#DJULIAN@ 18 JUNE 1502 (Saturday before the Feast of
the Nativity of St John the Baptist)`" is a valid *interpreted date*.
In this case the *date phrase* does not mention the year: perhaps it
was inferred from its context or was stated elsewhere in the document.

{.note}  An *interpreted date* might sometimes be of lower *reliability*
than if the *date* were written without a *date phrase*, as the presence
of a *data phrase* typically indicates some subtlety in interpreting the
*date*.

Being a *language-tagged string*, a *date phrase* has a *language tag*
associated with it.  This *language tag* is not embedded in the *date*
but is provided externally by the serialisation format.

{.note ...}  In [ELF Serialisation], the *language tag* is provided by a
`LANG` tag, which *may* be a substructure of the `DATE` tag, failing which
it *may* be a substructure of one of the superstructure of the `DATE`
tag, failing which it *may* be in the ELF header.  For example, 

    2 DATE INT 25 JAN 1840 (L'an mil huit cent quarante, le vingt-cinquième jour du mois de janvier)
    3 LANG French
{/}

{.ednote}  Review the previous note once [ELF Serialisation] has been
developed further.

#### Date ranges                                          {#date-ranges}

A **date range** is a *time interval* used to record an unknown *date*
which can be placed within certain bounds.  A *date range* *may* be
bounded from below, from above, or both.  It matches the `DateRange`
production:

    DateRange   ::= ( "BEF" | "AFT" ) S Date | "BET" S Date S "AND" S Date

A *date range* beginning with a `BEF` token represents an unknown
*instant* on or before the specified *date*.  A *date range* beginning
with a `AFT` token represents an unknown *instant* on or after the
specified *date*.  

It is *recommended* that the `BEF` and `AFT` forms of *date ranges* are
only used if it is believed the specified *date* is probably within a
few years of the unknown *date* being represented.

{.example}  If an individual was elected mayor of a city in 1745 and the
cultural norms of the time mean the person was likely a middle-aged
adult, their *date* of birth *should not* be recorded as "`BEF 1745`".
Even though this would literally be true, insofar as the person was
indeed born before 1745, and this representation is not prohibited, it
is *not recommended*.  The person could well have been born in the
previous century which would be stretching the definition of "a few
years".  If there is need to give a date of birth, a crude estimate
given with the `EST` token might be preferable.

A *date range* using the `BET` &hellip; `AND` construct represents an
unknown *instant* on or after the first specified *date*, and on or
before the second specified *date*.  This is a way of specifying an
unknown *date* in terms of its *precision range*.  In this form of *date
range*, the first specified *date* *must not* be later than the second
specified *date*.

{.example}  If someone's *age* is recorded as 26 on a census conducted
on 3 April 1881, their *date* of birth could be recorded as "`BET 4 APR
1854 AND 3 APR 1855`".  However the usual practice in GEDCOM is to record
this as "`ABT 1855`".

{.ednote}  Should ELF encourage users to prefer the *date range* form in
the previous example? 

*Date ranges* using the `BET` &hellip; `AND` format contain two *dates*
and therefore potentially two *calendar escapes*.  The second *date*
does not inherit the *calendar escape* from the first date, and it
*must* be respecified when required.  It is *recommended* that, where
possible, the same *calendar escape* be used on both *dates*.

{.note}  Although [GEDCOM 5.5.1] supports *date ranges* where the two
*dates* use different *calendar escapes*, not all current
implementations support them.  They are best avoided where possible.

### The `elf:DateValue` datatype                           {#DateValue}

The `elf:DateValue` *datatype* is used to record historical *dates*.  It
allows *dates* to be represented using the generic *date* syntax or any
of the modifier forms given in {§modifiers}.  It *may* also be a
*date period* as defined in {§DatePeriod}.  Its *lexical space* is the
set of *strings* which match the following `DateValue` production:

    DateValue ::= Date | DateApprox | DateInterp | DateRange | DatePeriod

{.ednote}  In the many places in ELF, it is wrong to use a *date period*
where an `elf:DateValue` is required.  This is not the case with the
other options allowed in the `DateValue` production.  The difference is
that a *date period* represents a state which persisted for an extended
*time interval*, while the others represent a single *instant* (or at
least an event of short duration that is conveniently approximated to an
*instant*).  FHISO are considering removing `DatePeriod` from the
`DateValue` production, above, and allowing it as an explicit option in
certain contexts.  However this introduces the same complications as
introducing separate `elf:AgeWord` *datatype*, and which are discussed
in an editorial note at the end of {§age}.

The `elf:DateValue` *datatype* is a *language-tagged datatype*, however
the associated *language tag* is ignored unless the *date* contains a
*date phrase*.  *Conformant* applications are not required to preserve
the *language tag* of *dates* without a *date phrase*, and *may* replace
it with an arbitrary *language tag*.

{.note}  This allows applications to store the *language tag* as part of
the *date phrase*, and allows them to serialise an `elf:DateValue` that
does not contain a *date phrase* using an arbitrary *language tag*.  In
particular, this means a *date* read from an ELF file in one language
*may* be serialised as part of an ELF file in another language without
explicitly annotating it with a `LANG` substructure, unless the *date*
contains a *date phrase*.

Formally, the `elf:DateValue` *datatype* is a *structured
language-tagged datatype* which has the following properties:

: Datatype definition

------           -----------------------------------------------
Name             `https://terms.fhiso.org/elf/DateValue`
Type             `http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#Datatype`
Pattern          *See below*
Supertype        `http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#langString`
Abstract         `false`
------           -----------------------------------------------

The *pattern* for this *datatype* is as follows:

<div style="font-size: smaller">\begingroup\footnotesize

{#include DateValue.md}

\endgroup
</div>

{.note}  The grammar productions given in this standard provide a more
useful description of *datatype* for a human reader.  The *pattern*
above is used during *datatype correction* in certain *optional*
contexts.  It was generated automatically from the grammar productions,
and any discrepancy between the grammar and this *pattern* is
unintentional.

### The `elf:DatePeriod` datatype                          {#DatePeriod}

A **date period** is a *time interval* used to record a state of being
that persisted throughout the stated *time interval* which represents an
extended period of history; they are also used to record the period of
coverage of a source.  They are represented in ELF using the
`elf:DatePeriod` *datatype* whose *lexical space* is set set of
*strings* which match the following `DatePeriod` production:
 
    DatePeriod  ::= "FROM" S Date ( S "TO" S Date )? | "TO" S Date

Use of a *date period* does not necessarily mean the state was believed
to have begun on the specified "from" *date*, nor that it ended on the
specified "to" *date*, though where possible this is *recommended*.
Either the start *date* or the end *date* *may* be omitted from the
*date period*, in which case the missing *date* is interpreted as an
unknown *date*.  

{.example}  Abraham Lincoln was President of the United States from
1861 to 1865.  This could recorded using the *date period* "`FROM 1861
TO 1865`", or more *precisely* as "`FROM 4 MAR 1861 TO 15 APR 1865`".
If it were unknown when Lincoln's presidency began, it could be written
"`TO 15 APR 1865`".  If it was also known that Lincoln was president at
the time of the Battle of Gettysburg in July 1863, the *date period* of
his presidency could be written "`FROM JUL 1863 TO 15 APR 1865`".  This
does not imply Lincoln became president in 1863, only that he was
president for the whole of the period from 1863 to 1865.

{.ednote}  Neither GEDCOM nor this draft of ELF has a way of saying
whether the *date period* is believed to be the complete period during
which the state persisted.  This is perhaps a shortcoming that a future
version of ELF should resolve.  The obvious solution is to say that a
*date period* always represents the full period, and allow the various
*date modifiers* from {§modifiers} to be used in the end *instants* of
the *date period*.  In the previous example where Lincoln was known to
have been president for the Battle of Gettysburg, and to have died in
office on 15 April 1865, this could be written "`FROM BEF JUL 1863 TO 15
APR 1865`".  This could be done without allowing arbitrary nested *date
modifiers*.

{.note}  The difference between a *date range* and a *date period* is
sometimes misunderstood, and applications should be alert to the wrong
representation being used.  A *date range* is used to record an
*instant*, or an event of short duration, when its *date* is not
*precisely* known, whereas a *date period* is used to record a state
that persisted throughout the specified *time interval*.

{.example ...}  Civil birth, marriage and death registrations in England
and Wales are indexed in quarterly volumes which do not list the
*precise* *date* of the event.  The coverage of this source is
represented in ELF using a *date period*:

    0 @S1@ SOUR
    1 TITL GRO Marriages Index 
    1 DATA
    2 EVEN MARR 
    3 DATE FROM 1 JAN 1898 TO 31 MAR 1898

However the event itself *must not* be recorded using a *date period*
because the marriage did not take place over an extended period: it
happened on one particular *date* which is not *precisely* known.  For
this purpose a *date range* *should* be used.

    0 FAM
    1 MARR
    2 DATE BET 1 JAN 1898 AND 31 MAR 1898

A less *precise* alternative would be to just give a year.
{/}

: Datatype definition

------           -----------------------------------------------
Name             `https://terms.fhiso.org/elf/DatePeriod`
Type             `http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#Datatype`
Pattern          *See below*
Supertype        `http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#langString`
Abstract         `false`
------           -----------------------------------------------

The *pattern* for this *datatype* is as follows:

<div style="font-size: smaller">\begingroup\footnotesize

{#include DatePeriod.md}

\endgroup
</div>

## Calendar definitions                                     {#calendars}

This section defines four standard *calendars* for use with ELF: the
Gregorian, Julian, Hebrew and French Republican *calendars*.
*Conformant* applications are *required* to support all four.

{.ednote}  There is no technical need for applications to support
anything other than the Gregorian *calendar*.  Would it be better to
make only this one *required* and the others *recommended*?  Ideally,
applications would do more than simply check *dates* are syntactically
valid and would offer conversions between supported *calendars*, *date*
arithmetic, the ability to look up the day of the week and the *dates*
of important feast days.  Few applications currently offer this.  Would
reducing the number of *required* *calendars* make it easier for vendors
to provide such functionality? 

{.ednote}  The definitions given in this section only specify those
details which are necessary to determine whether a *date* is
*well-formed* in the given *calendar*.  Should these descriptions be
expanded to give more details to help applications convert between
*calendars*?

### The Gregorian calendar                                  {#gregorian}

{.note} The Gregorian *calendar* is the name given to the now ubiquitous
*calendar* introduced by Pope Gregory XIII in 1582 to correct the Julian
*calendar* which was slowly drifting relative to the seasons.  It is
represented by the `@#DGREGORIAN@` *calendar escape*, and is also ELF's
default *calendar*, used whenever a *date* has no *calendar escape* and
is *well-formed* in the Gregorian *calendar*.

The Gregorian *calendar* has an *epoch* at the start of the *calendar
day* 1 January 1&nbsp;AD, as expressed in the Gregorian *calendar*,
and two *epoch names* relative to that *epoch*: a *reverse epoch name*
"`B.C.`", and a *forwards epoch name* "`A.D.`".  The latter is the
*default epoch name* for the *calendar*, and its name *should* be
omitted.

{.example}  The *date* "`24 DEC 2018 A.D.`" is equivalent to "`24 DEC
2018`".  The latter is *recommended* for compatibility with [GEDCOM
5.5.1] which does not support the "`A.D.`" *epoch name*.

{.ednote} Do we want "`B.C.E.`" and "`C.E.`" (standing for Before Common
Era and Common Era, respectively) as aliases?  There is no technical
justification for adding them.  Supporting "`BCE`" as an alias for
"`B.C.E.`" is problematic as it is three letters long, meaning matches
the `Month` production rather than `Epoch` production.  However "`BCE`"
has been reserved so it cannot be used as a *month name*.

Regardless of *epoch name*, the *logical year* *shall* be an integer
greater than 0.

{.note}  This prohibits negative or zero year numbers as they are not
needed.  The year before "`1 A.D.`" is "`1 B.C.`".

{.note}  [GEDCOM 5.5.1] says that *logical years* *must* be 3 or 4
digits long, and presumably requires dates in the first century to be
zero padded.  This standard has no such requirement, and many current
applications do not enforce this requirement.

*Dual years* *must not* be used in the Gregorian *calendar*.

{.note} This is a deviation from [GEDCOM 5.5.1] which allows *dual
years* only on Gregorian *dates*.  In this standard, a *date* with a
*dual year* is not *well-formed* in the Gregorian *calendar*.
This means a *date* using a *dual year* and no explicit *calendar
escape* will be assigned the `@#DUNKNOWN@` *calendar escape*.

{.ednote}  In practice there is a very strong likelihood that the Julian
*calendar* is intended.  This draft could have altered the default
*calendar* rules in {§cal-escapes} so that *dates* using *dual years*
and no explicit *calendar escape* were automatically labelled
`@#DJULIAN@`.  The reason this was not done is that an ELF file
containing such *dates* is likely to have many other miscalendared
*dates* but which are *well-formed* in the Gregorian *calendar*
and so go undetected.  Flagging those with *dual years* with
`@#DUNKNOWN@` will hopefully bring this to the researcher's attention,
with the result that all the miscalendared *dates* are fixed.

Every *calendar year* in the Gregorian *calendar* consists of 12
*calendar months*.  Their *month names* are given in the table below in
order of their occurrence in the *calendar year*.  The table also gives
the usual form of their name in English, and the number of *calendar
days* in each month.  The *calendar days* in each *calendar month* are
numbered sequentially starting with 1.

-------  ----------   -----------------------------
`JAN`    January      31 days
`FEB`    February     28 or 29 days &mdash; see below
`MAR`    March        31 days
`APR`    April        30 days
`MAY`    May          31 days
`JUN`    June         30 days
`JUL`    July         31 days
`AUG`    August       31 days
`SEP`    September    30 days
`OCT`    October      31 days
`NOV`    November     30 days
`DEC`    December     31 days
-------  ----------   -----------------------------

The number of *calendar days* in February varies depending on the
*logical year*.  The rules for determining this number in years with
the "`A.D.`" *epoch name* are as follows:

*  If the *logical year* number is exactly divisible by 400, 
   then February has 29 days.
*  Otherwise, if the *logical year* number is exactly divisible by 100,
   then February has 28 days.
*  Otherwise, if the *logical year* number is exactly divisible by 4,
   then February has 29 days.
*  Otherwise, February has 28 days.

In the Gregorian *calendar*, a *calendar year* in which February has 29
*calendar days* is called a **leap year**, while a *calendar year* in
which February has only 28 *calendar days* is called a **non-leap
year**.

{.note} Other *calendars* defined the phrases *leap year* and *non-leap
year* differently.

For years with the "`B.C.`" *epoch name*, the *logical year* number is
subtracted from one to get zero or a negative number, which is then used
in place of the *logical year* in the preceding rules.

{.example}  The year 5&nbsp;BC was a *leap year* in the proleptic Gregorian
*calendar*, meaning February had 29 *calendar days*.  This is because
subtracting 5 from 1 gives &minus;4 which is exactly divisible by 4.

{.note}  Although the Gregorian *calendar* was first introduced in 1582,
ELF allows its use proleptically, including for *dates* BC.  This is a
partial departure from [GEDCOM 5.5.1] which only allows *incomplete
dates* referencing only a *calendar year* to use the "`B.C.`" *epoch
name*.

A *date* which uses a *calendar day* number which is greater than the
number of *calendar days* in the specified year and month is not a
*well-formed* *date*.

{.example}  The *date* "`29 FEB 2018`" is not *well-formed* in
the Gregorian *calendar* because February only had 28 days in 2018 due to
2018 not being exactly divisible by 4.

#### The `elf:DateExact` datatype                           {#DateExact}

The `elf:DateExact` *datatype* is used to record the creation or
modification *date* of various objects in the ELF data model using the
Gregorian *calendar*.  The *lexical space* of this *datatype* is the set
of *strings* which match the following `GregDate` production and which
are additionally *well-formed* *dates* in the Gregorian *calendar*
defined in {§gregorian}.

    GregDate  ::= GregDay S GregMonth S GregYear

    GregDay   ::= [0-9] [0-9]?
    GregMonth ::= "JAN" | "FEB" | "MAR" | "ARP" | "MAY" | "JUN" | "JUL"
                  | "AUG" | "SEP" | "OCT" | "NOV" | "DEC"
    GregYear  ::= [0-9] [0-9] [0-9] [0-9]

{.example}  The *string* "`24 DEC 2018`" matches the `GregDate`
production and is a *well-formed* *date* in the Gregorian *calendar*.
It is therefore in the *lexical space* of `elf:DateExact`.  "`54 NOV
2018`" is not in the *lexical space* of `elf:DateExact` despite matching
the `GregDate` production because it is not a *well-formed* *date* in
the Gregorian *calendar* due to November only having 30 days. 

{.note ...} This *datatype* is more restricted than a Gregorian *date*
written in the generic *date* syntax due to the following additional
constraints:

*   There *must not* be a *calendar escape*.
*   There *calendar day* and *calendar month* *must* be present.
*   The *calendar year* component *must* be four digits long.
*   The *epoch name* *must not* be present.
*   The *date modifiers* defined in {§modifiers} *must not* be used.
*   It *must not* be a *date period*.
{/}

Formally, the `elf:DateExact` *datatype* is a *structured
non-language-tagged datatype* which has the following *properties*:

: Datatype definition

------           -----------------------------------------------
Name             `https://terms.fhiso.org/elf/DateExact`
Type             `http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#Datatype`
Pattern          `[0-9]{1,2}[ \t\r\n](JAN|FEB|MAR|ARP|`<!-- -->`MAY|JUN|JUL|AUG|SEP|OCT`
                 `|NOV|DEC)[ \t\r\n][0-9]{4}`
Supertype        *No non-trivial supertypes*
Abstract         `false`
------           -----------------------------------------------

{.note} The *pattern* in the table above has been split on to three
lines for convenience of presentation; it is, however, really one
*pattern* and contains no *whitespace* or line breaks.
Any functional difference between the `GregDate` production and the
*pattern* specified above is unintentional.

{.note}  The `elf:DateExact` *datatype* is not specified as a *subtype*
of the `elf:DateValue` *datatype* because the latter is a
*language-tagged datatype*.

### The Julian calendar                                        {#julian}

{.note}  The Julian *calendar* is the name given to the *calendar*
introduced by Julius Caesar in 45&nbsp;BC and subsequently amended by
Augustus in about 8&nbsp;BC to correct an error in the application of
its *leap year* rule during its first three decades.  The Augustan form
of the Julian *calendar* is represented by the `@#DJULIAN@` *calendar
escape*.  Because the Gregorian *calendar* derived from the Julian
*calendar*, many of the details here are the same as those in
{§gregorian}.

The Julian *calendar* has an *epoch* at the start of the *calendar
day* 1 January 1&nbsp;AD, as expressed in the Julian *calendar*, or 30
December 1&nbsp;BC, as expressed in the proleptic Gregorian *calendar*.
The Julian *calendar* has the same two *epoch names*, "`B.C.`" and
"`A.D.`", as the Gregorian *calendar*, but defined relative to the
Julian *epoch* instead of the Gregorian *epoch*.  The "`A.D.`" *epoch
name* is the *default epoch name* for the *calendar*, and its name
*should* be omitted.

As for the Gregorian *calendar*, regardless of *epoch name*, the
*logical year* *shall* be an integer greater than 0.

*Dual years* are only allowed when the *logical year* and the
*historical year* differ by exactly one year.  They are used to
represent the differing conventions for the first day of the year.

{.note} This is a deviation from [GEDCOM 5.5.1] where *dual years* are
not permitted with the Julian *calendar*.   

{.note}  *Logical years* always begin on 1 January, but *historical
years* can begin on an arbitrary day of the year which can result in the
*historical year* being ahead or behind the *logical year*.  Because the
use of *dual years* is not restricted to just years beginning on Lady
Day, it is not in general possible to tell simply from the fact that a
*dual year* was used what convention for the start of the year.   This
can usually be inferred from context, and the *logical year* allows an
application to process the *date* without knowing this.

{.example ...}  In France, the year was reckoned to begin on Easter
Sunday until 1564 (or 1565 &mdash; the change did not happen uniformly).
An application cannot tell when reading the *date* "`10 FEB 1521/22`"
whether it has been written using the French convention of starting the
year on Easter Sunday or the English convention of starting the year on
Lady Day, but it is not normally necessary to know this as this *date*
refers to the same *calendar day* regardless of when the *historical
year* began.

This is an example where the *historical year* alone could be ambiguous
due to Easter being a movable feast.  In France, there were two days
which would have been written "1er jour d'avril, 1522", as Easter was
early in the *logical year* 1522 and late in 1523.  For both days
described as 1 April 1522, the *historical year* is 1522, but only for
the first is the *logical year* also 1522: for the second, it is 1523.
This means the first *date* *must* be encoded in ELF as "`1 APR 1522`",
while the second *should* be encoded as "`1 APR 1522/23`" (though it
*may* alternatively be encoded as "`1 APR 1523`", without using a *dual
year*).
{/}

Every *calendar year* in the Julian *calendar*, as reckoned by *logical
year*, consists of the same 12 *calendar months* as the Gregorian
calendar.  Their *month names*, the usual English form of their name,
and the number of *calendar days* in each *calendar month* is as given
for the Gregorian calendar in the table in {§gregorian}.  The only
difference between the *calendars* is the rule for determining the
number of *calendar days* in February.

In the Julian *calendar*, the rules for determining the number of
*calendar days* in February are as follows:

*  If the *logical year* number is exactly divisible by 4,
   then February has 29 days.
*  Otherwise, February has 28 days.

The terms *leap year* and *non-leap year* are defined as for the
Gregorian *calendar*.

{.example}  The year 1900 was a *leap year* in the Gregorian *calendar*,
as 1900 is divisible by 100, but it was not a *leap year* in the Julian
*calendar*.  This means "`29 FEB 1900`" is a *well-formed* *date* in the
Gregorian *calendar*, but not in the Julian *calendar*.

For years with the "`B.C.`" *epoch name*, the *logical year* number is
subtracted from one to get zero or a negative number, which is then used
in place of the *logical year* in the preceding rules.

{.note}  The year 5&nbsp;BC was a *leap year* according to ELF's
definition of the Julian *calendar*, because subtracting 5 from 1 gives
&minus;4 which is divisible by 4.  In fact, the year 5&nbsp;BC was
almost certainly not a *leap year* as the Augustan reform was still
taking effect at this point.  There is disagreement between scholars
on the exact details of the reform, but is generally accepted that by
AD&nbsp;8 the rule for *leap years* given above was being applied
correctly.  Any use of the Julian calendar (in its final Augustan form)
before about AD&nbsp;5 should therefore be regarded as proleptic.

A *date* which uses a *calendar day* number which is greater than the
number of *calendar days* in the specified year and month is not a
*well-formed* *date*.

### The French Republican calendar                                   {#french}

{.note} The French Republican *calendar* or French Revolutionary
*calendar* are the names given to the new *calendar* adopted in 1794 by
the French National Convention.  It is represented in ELF by the
`@#DFRENCH R@` *calendar escape*.

The French Republican *calendar* has an *epoch* at the start of the
Gregorian *calendar day* 22 September 1792, the date the First French
Republic was founded.  This *date* is identified as 1 Vendémiaire I
in the new *calendar*.

{.note}  It is common to write French Republican *calendar years* using
Roman numerals.

The *calendar* has a single anonymous *forwards epoch name*.  It does
not provide a *backwards epoch name* for referring to *dates* before the
founding of the First Republic, nor are zero or negative *logical years*
permitted.

{.ednote}  If it proves undesirable to have an anonymous *epoch name*,
the usual phrases are "l'époque républicaine" and "l'ère de la republique".
An *epoch name* of "`E.R.`" would therefore seem appropriate.

The *logical year* *shall* be an integer greater than 0 and *should*
be no greater than 18.  Applications *may* consider any *date* with a
*logical year* greater than 18 to be not *well-formed*.

{.note}  The placement of *leap years* in the French Revolutionary
*calendar* was never defined satisfactorily due to an ambiguity in the
legislation that had not been resolved when the *calendar* was
abolished.  The *calendar* was in actual use during years II to XIV, and
the placement of *leap years* in the period between years I and XVIII is
unambiguous.  The *calendar* was used again very briefly during the
Paris Commune in May 1871 (Floréal and Prairial LXXIX), and applications
are encouraged to support this, but ELF does not require this as the
number of sources of genealogical relevance from the Paris Commune is
likely to be small.

*Dual years* *must not* be used in the French Republican *calendar*.

Every *calendar year* in the French Republican *calendar* consists of 12
*calendar months*, which are followed by 5 or 6 intercalary days or
**jours complémentaires** which ELF treats as a thirteenth month.  Their
*month names* are given in the table below in order of their occurrence
in the *calendar year*.  The table also gives the usual form of their
name in French, and the number of *calendar days* in each month.  The
*calendar days* in each *calendar month* are numbered sequentially
starting with 1.

-------  ---------------          -----------------------------
`VEND`   Vendémiaire              30 days
`BRUM`   Brumaire                 30 days
`FRIM`   Frimaire                 30 days
`NIVO`   Nivôse                   30 days
`PLUV`   Pluviôse                 30 days 
`VENT`   Ventôse                  30 days
`GERM`   Germinal                 30 days
`FLOR`   Floréal                  30 days
`PRAI`   Prairial                 30 days
`MESS`   Messidor                 30 days
`THER`   Thermidor (or Fervidor)  30 days
`FRUC`   Fructidor                30 days
`COMP`   Jours complémentaires    5 or 6 days &mdash; see below
-------  ---------------          -----------------------------

{.note} The month of Thermidor was also called Fervidor, however ELF
uses the *month name* `THER` regardless of which form the source uses.
`FERV` *must not* be used.

In the French Republican *calendar*, a *calendar year* with 6 
*jours complémentaires* is called a **leap year**, while a *calendar
year* with only 5 *jours complémentaires* is called a **non-leap year**.
If the *logical year* number is 3, 7, 11 or 15, the *calendar year* was
a *leap year*; all other years with *logical year* numbers between 1 and
18, inclusive, were *non-leap years*.

{.note}  This standard does not specify when *leap years* occurred after
year XVIII because the legislation was ambiguous.  The legislation
required *leap years* to be arranged such that the autumnal equinox
would fall on the first day of the year, 1 Vendémiaire, as observed from
the Paris Observatory.  Under this rule, the *leap year* after year XV
would have been five years later, in year XX.  However the legislation
also said that *leap years* were every four years, in which case the
next *leap year* would have been XIX.  A solution was proposed by
Charles-Gilbert Romme, one of the creators of the *calendar*, which
would have placed a *leap year* in year XX, and then one every four
years with similar rules as the Gregorian *calendar* applying every
century.   No decision had been made when Napoléon abolished the
*calendar*, so no definitive statement can be made on which subsequent
years were *leap years*, and this standard does not require any
particular interpretation.  Applications *may* do any of the above and
remain *conformant*; they *may* also reject anything after year XVII as
not being *well-formed*.

A *date* which uses a *calendar day* number which is greater than the
number of *calendar days* in the specified year and month is not a
*well-formed date*.  This provision applies to *jours complémentaires*
too.

### The Hebrew calendar                                        {#hebrew}

{.note} The Hebrew *calendar* is the name given to the *calendar* used
by Jewish peoples around the world which developed into its current form
in the early ninth century.  It is represented in ELF by the
`@#DHEBREW@` *calendar escape*.

The Hebrew *calendar* has an *epoch* at the start of the *calendar day*
referred to as 7 September 3761&nbsp;BC in the proleptic Gregorian
*calendar*.  This *date* is identified as 1 Tishrei AM&nbsp;1 in the
Hebrew *calendar*.

{.note}  The *date* of this *epoch* is more commonly quoted as 7 October
3761&nbsp;BC, which is its *date* in the proleptic Julian *calendar*.
This is the *date* of the start of the Hebrew *calendar year*
traditionally believed to contain the Creation.

{.ednote}  A day in the Hebrew *calendar* is normally reckoned to begin at
sunset, which means the *epoch* should properly be at sunset on 6
September 3761&nbsp;BC in the proleptic Gregorian *calendar*, or 6
October 3761&nbsp;BC in the proleptic Julian *calendar*.  However, as
noted in {§time-concepts}, the definition of a *calendar day* given in
[ISO 8601] and adopted here says a *calendar day* starts at midnight.

The *calendar* has a single *forwards epoch name*, "`A.M.`", which is
the *default epoch name* for the *calendar*.  It *should* be omitted
when serialising *dates* in ELF.  The *calendar* does not provide a
*backwards epoch name* for referring to *dates* before the Hebrew
*epoch*, nor are zero or negative *logical years* permitted.

{.note}  [GEDCOM 5.5.1] does allow the "`B.C.`" *epoch name* to be used
with the Hebrew *calendar*, but it seems almost certain this is an error
in that standard.  ELF does not permit "`B.C.`" to be used with
this *calendar*, and any Hebrew *dates* using of it will not be
*well-formed date*.

It is *not recommended* for *dual years* to be used with the Hebrew
*calendar*.

{.note}  This is not an outright prohibition on *dual years*, and
alternative calculations of the year of Creation were used to number
*calendar years* in early times.  These could be used as *historical
years*, typically differing from the *logical year* by no more than
three years.

Every *calendar year* in the Hebrew *calendar* consists of either 12 or
13 *calendar months*.  Their *month names* are given in the table below
in order of their occurrence in the *calendar year*.  The table also
gives the usual form of their name in English and Hebrew, and the number
of *calendar days* in each month.  The *calendar days* in each *calendar
month* are numbered sequentially starting with 1.

-------  ----------  -----------------------------      ---------------------
`TSH`    Tishrei                              תשרי      30 days
`CSH`    Cheshvan                            חשוון      29 days, or sometimes 30 days &mdash; see below
`KSL`    Kislev                               כסלו      30 days, or sometimes 29 days &mdash; see below
`TVT`    Tevet                                 טבת      29 days
`SHV`    Shevat                                שבט      30 days
`ADR`    Adar I       <span dir="rtl">אדר א</span>      30 days, if present &mdash; see below
`ADS`    Adar II      <span dir="rtl">אדר ב</span>      29 days
`NSN`    Nisan                                ניסן      30 days
`IYR`    Iyar                                 אייר      29 days
`SVN`    Sivan                               סיוון      30 days
`TMZ`    Tammuz                               תמוז      29 days
`AAV`    Av                                     אב      30 days
`ELL`    Elul                                 אלול      29 days
-------  ----------  -----------------------------      ---------------------

{.note}  The English names given above are transliterations of the
Hebrew, and many variants of the transliterations can be found.
Cheshvan is a shortened form of Marcheshvan (<span
dir="rtl">מרחשון</span>) produced by dropping the first syllable.  Adar
I and Adar II are otherwise known as Adar Rishon (<span dir="rtl">אדר
ראשון</span>) and Adar Sheni (<span dir="rtl">אדר שני</span>),
respectively, using the Hebrew words for first and second.  Adar I and
II are also sometimes called Adar Aleph and Adar Bet (<span
dir="rtl">אדר א</span> and <span dir="rtl">אדר ב</span>) after the first
and second letters in the Hebrew alphabet.

{.note}  For religious purposes, the *calendar year* is sometimes said
to begin with the *calendar month* of Nisan.  ELF uses the usual civil
definition of the year beginning with the *calendar month* of Tishrei.

*Calendar years* containing 13 *calendar months* are called **leap
years**, and fall in a 19 year cycle called the **Metonic cycle**.
*Calendar years* which are not *leap years* are called **non-leap
years**.  To determine whether a year is a *leap year*, the *logical
year* number is divided by 19 and the remainder taken to find the year's
place in the *Metonic cycle*.  If the remainder is 0, 3, 6, 8, 11, 14 or
17 then the year is a *leap year*; otherwise it is a *non-leap year*.

In a *non-leap year*, the *calendar month* of Adar&nbsp;I is omitted and
Adar&nbsp;II is known simply as Adar (<span dir="rtl">אדר</span>).
Nevertheless, the *month name* used for Adar in a *non-leap year* is
"`ADR`", the same *month name* as Adar&nbsp;I in a *leap year*.  "`ADS`"
is not *well-formed* when used as a *month name* in a *non-leap year*,
and it is *recommended* that applications rewrite it to "`ADR`".

{.note}  The intended handling of Adar in *non-leap years* is very
poorly unspecified in [GEDCOM 5.5.1].  As Adar I is the extra month
inserted into the *calendar*, it would make sense if Adar were
represented as "`ADS`" in *non-leap years*, but in practice this seems
not to be what current vendors do.  Possibly because [GEDCOM 5.5.1]
describes "`ADR`" as standing for Adar rather than Adar I or Adar
Rishon, vendors have used "`ADR`" to represent Adar in *non-leap years*
and Adar&nbsp;I in *leap years*.  ELF standardises that behaviour.

The rule for deciding when Cheshvan is extended in length to have 30
*calendar days*, and when Kislev is reduced in length to have 29
*calendar days*, are somewhat complex and based on when in the week the
Tishrei *molad* falls.   

{.note}  Although an application needs to know how many *calendar days*
are in each *calendar month* in order to determine whether a *date* is a
*well-formed date*, an applications can be *conformant* without being
able to determine whether a *date* is *well-formed*.  This would allow a
*conformant* application to support the Hebrew *calendar* without full
knowledge of how long each *calendar month* is.  An application which
cannot determine how many *calendar days* are in Cheshvan and Kislev in
a particular year, *must* consider "`30 CSH`" and "`30 KSL`" to be
*well-formed* regardless of year.

The **molad** is the calculated *instant* of the new moon, as seen from
Jerusalem.  The first *molad* occurred 5 hours and 204 *halakim* into
Monday, 1 Tishrei AM&nbsp;1.  A **helek** (plural: **halakim**) is a
traditional Hebrew subdivision of the hour equal to 3⅓ seconds: there
are 1080 *halakim* in an hour.  The week used by the Hebrew *calendar*
is the standard seven day week.  

{.note}  This time is stated relative to the traditional Hebrew start of
the day, which was at sunset the previous evening; it also uses unequal
hours so that the time between sunset and sunrise is always 12 hours,
regardless of the time of year.  Applications do not need to be aware of
this detail as all times are expressed using Hebrew time reckoning in
this calculation.  All they need to know is that there are 1080
*halakim* (also spelt "chalakim") in an hour, 24 hours in a *calendar
day*, and 7 *calendar days* in a week.  

In the Hebrew *calendar* calculations in this standard, *instants*
within a week are expressed with as three integers separated with
colons.  These being the day number, the number of hours into the day,
and the number of *halakim* into the hour.  Days of the week are
numbered with Saturday being 0.

{.example}  The *instant* of the first *molad* can be written
2:5:204, meaning 5 hours and 204 *halakim* into a Monday.

The *molad* for any given *calendar month* and *calendar year* is
calculated from an earlier *molad* whose time and day of the week are
known by adding 4 weeks, 1 day, 12 hours, and 793 *halakim* per elapsed
*calendar month* between *molads*. 

{.note}  This *duration* is commonly written 4:1:12:793, where the
components are weeks, days, hours and *halakim*, though the number of
weeks can be dropped for the purpose of determining the length of the
*calendar year*.  As 793 *halakim* does not equate to an integer number
of seconds, doing the calculation in *halakim* rather than seconds
avoids rounding errors if floating point arithmetic is used.  

{.note}  The computation of the *molad* is simplified by knowing that a
complete 19 year *Metonic cycle* always contains exactly 235 *calendar
months*.

{.example}  The year AM&nbsp;5779 began in September AD&nbsp;2018, 5778
years after the first *molad*.  5778 divided by 19 is 304, with a
remainder of 2, so from the first *molad* to the Tishrei *molad* for
AM&nbsp;5779, there were 304 complete *Metonic cycles* plus two extra
years, which are both *non-leap years*, being years 1 and 2 in the
*Metonic cycle*.  This means 71&thinsp;464 *calendar months* elapsed
between the first *molad* and the Tishrei *molad* for AM&nbsp;5779.
Adding 71&thinsp;464 lots of 4:1:12:793 to 2:5:204 gives
301482:2:14:316.  The number of weeks can be discarded as it is
irrelevant when determining the year length, leaving just 2:14:316.
This says the Tushrei *molad* for the year AM&nbsp;5779 happened on a
Monday, being the second day after the Sabbath, at 08:17:33⅓, when
converted to hours, minutes and seconds after midnight, rather than
hours and *halakim* after sunset.

Once the Tishrei *molad* is known, the length of the *calendar year* can
be determine using the following table.  If the Tishrei *molad* is on or
after the *instant* in the first column, and before the *instant* in the
second column, then the length of the *calendar year* can be found in
one of the last four columns, depending on the position of the year in
the *Metonic cycle* as shown in the column headings.

Molad ≥     Molad <     1, 4, 9, 12 or 15   7 or 18   2, 5, 10, 13 or 16   0, 3, 6, 8, 11, 14 or 17
---------   ---------   ------------------  --------  -------------------  -------------------------
0:00:000    0:18:000    355                 355       355                  385
0:18:000    1:09:204    353                 353       353                  383
1:09:204    1:20:491    355                 355       355                  383
1:20:491    2:15:589    355                 355       355                  385
2:15:589    2:18:000    354                 354       355                  385
2:18:000    3:18:000    354                 354       354                  384
3:18:000    4:11:695    354                 354       354                  383
4:11:695    5:09:204    354                 354       354                  385
5:09:204    5:18:000    355                 355       355                  385
5:18:000    6:00:408    353                 353       353                  383
6:00:408    6:09:204    355                 353       353                  383
6:09:204    6:20:491    355                 355       355                  383
6:20:491    7:00:000    355                 355       355                  385

Cheshvan has 29 *calendar days* except when the *calendar year* is 355
or 385 *calendar days* long, in which case it has 30 *calendar days*.
Kislev has 30 *calendar days* except when the *calendar year* is only
353 or 383 *calendar days* long, in which case it only has 29 *calendar
days*.  

{.example}  The previous example calculated the Tishrei *molad* for
AM&nbsp;5779 to be at 2:14:316, which means the fourth row of the table
applies.  As 5779 divided by 19 is 304 with a remainder of 2, the year
AM&nbsp;5779 is the second year in the *Metonic cycle*, so the fifth
column, whose heading includes "2", gives the year length as 355
*calendar days*.  That means both Cheshvan and Kislev have 30 *calendar
days*.  "`30 CSH 5779`" and "`30 KSL 5779`" are therefore both
*well-formed* *dates*.

{.note}  This table is called the "Table of Four Gates".  Its
complexities are the result of the competing requirements that Yom
Kippur does not fall on a day adjacent to the Sabbath (i.e. that 10
Tishrei not fall on a Friday or Sunday); that the new moon represented
by the *molad* cannot be observed in daylight until it is six hours old
and Tishrei cannot start until the new moon it deemed observable;
that all months have 29 or 30 *calendar days*; and that only Cheshvan
and Kislev can vary in length.

A *date* which uses a *calendar day* number which is greater than the
number of *calendar days* in the specified year and month is not a
*well-formed date*.  

{.ednote}  The TSC decided to include a detailed specification of the
Hebrew *calendar* in this standard rather than referencing a third party
description largely because of the lack of a good, accessible
description of *calendar* presented in a way that would make it easy to
implement the *calendar* in ELF.  Most sources describing the *calendar*
do so in terms of the postponement rules which makes it easier to
understand why the *calendar* is as it is, but does not make it
straightforward to implement.  It is hoped that by providing these
details here, vendors will be encouraged to provide full implementations
of the *calendar*.

## The `elf:Time` datatype                                       {#time}

ELF uses the `elf:Time` *datatype* to represent *times of day* using the 24-hour
clock in *hours*, *minutes* and *seconds*, with these components
separated by a colon (U+003A).  The *hours* and *minutes* components are
*required*, and the *seconds* component *should* be provided.  A
fractional *seconds* component *may* be provided.  

{.example}  The value "`15:30:00`" is a valid *time of day*, represented using
the `elf:Time` *datatype*.  It represents half past three in the
afternoon.

The `elf:Time` *datatype* is typically used in conjunction with a value
of type `elf:DateExact` called its **associated date**.

{.note}  The `elf:DateExact` *datatype* is limited to expressing *dates*
in the Gregorian *calendar*, so the *associated date* will always be a
Gregorian *date*.

{.example ...}  In [ELF Data Model], *times of day* are found as `TIME`
substructures of a `DATE` element which has a payload of *datatype*
`elf:DateExact`.

    2 DATE 10 DEC 2018
    3 TIME 13:52:00

In this example, "`10 DEC 2018`" is the *associated date* for the time
"`13:52:00`".
{/}

The *lexical space* of the `elf:Time` *datatype* is the set of *strings*
which match the following `Time` production, as well as the other
constraints given here on the numerical value of each component.
*Whitespace* is not permitted anywhere in an `elf:Time` value.

    Time     ::=  HH ":" MM (":" SS)? TZD?  

    HH       ::= [0-9] [0-9]
    MM       ::= [0-9] [0-9]
    SS       ::= [0-9] [0-9] ("." [0-9]+)?
    TZD      ::= "Z" | ("+" | "-") HH ":" MM

The `HH` production encodes the *hours* component of the *time of day*,
zero-padded to two digits.  It *shall* be a decimal integer between `00`
and `24`, inclusive.  Values outside this range are outside the *lexical
space* of `elf:Time`.  The *hours* component *shall* only be `24` if the
*minutes* and *seconds* components are both zero or absent; any other
uses of `24` as an *hours* component is outside the *lexical space* of
the *datatype*.

{.example}  The *strings* "`30:00`" and "`24:30`" are both outside the
*lexical space* of this *datatype*.  The former is invalid because the
*hours* component of `30` is not between `00` to `24`; the latter is
invalid because it has an *hours* component of `24` and a non-zero
*minutes* component.

The *string* "`24:00:00`" is the **end-of-day instant** and denote the
final *instant* of a *calendar day*.  It is the same *instant* as the
first *instant* of the following *calendar day* (which is denoted
`00:00:00`).  *Conformant* applications *must* accept *end-of-day
instants* as valid input but *must not* create new instances of them.
A *conformant* application *may* convert an *end-of-day instant* to
`00:00:00`, but only if it has an *associated date* and that is
simultaneously incremented by one day.

{.example} A *time of day* of "`24:00:00`" with an *associated date* of
"`30 NOV 2018`" *may* be converted to a *time of day* of "`00:00:00`"
with an *associated date* of "`1 DEC 2018`".

{.note} [GEDCOM 5.5.1] does not specify whether or not the *end-of-day
instant* is legal, and existing applications are unlikely to produce it.
It is supported by `elf:Time` for compatibility with [ISO 8601] and the
`xsd:time` *datatype* defined in [XSD Pt2].

The `MM` production encodes the *minutes* component of the *time of day*,
zero-padded to two digits.  It *shall* be a decimal integer between `00`
and `59`, inclusive.  Values outside this range are outside the *lexical
space* of `elf:Time`. 

The `SS` production encodes the *seconds* component of the *time of day*,
zero-padded to two digits and followed by an *optional* fractional
component.  It *shall* be a decimal greater than or equal to `00` and
strictly less than `61`.  Values outside this range are outside the
*lexical space* of `elf:Time`.

Applications *must* preserve at least the first three decimal digits of
a fractional *seconds* component, but *may* truncate or round the
fractional part of the *seconds* component beyond that.  Applications
*may* add or remove trailing zeros on the frational part of the
*seconds* component, and *should* add a *seconds* component of `:00` if
none was given.

{.note}  These provisions allows applications to process *times of day*
using the standard data structures and facilities provided in many
program languages, without preserving the original lexical form of the
*time of day*.

{.note}  A future version of this standard is likely to make the
*seconds* component *required* to make this *datatype* fully compatible
with the `xsd:time` *datatype* defined in [XSD Pt2].  

A *seconds* component greater than or equal to `60`, and strictly less
than `61` is called a **leap second** component.  Any use of a *leap
second* component is part of the *lexical space* of `elf:Time`, but
applications *shall* only create new *leap second* to represent *leap
seconds* inserted by the International Earth Rotation Service or its
successor.

*Conformant* applications encountering a *leap seconds* component *may*
convert it to an ordinary *seconds* component by subtracting one from
its value.  This *should not* be done if the application supports
*leap seconds* and knows the specified *time of day* was a *leap second*.

{.example}  The *string* "`12:56:60.800`" is in the *lexical space* of
this *datatype* and has a *leap second* component of `60.800`.  As *leap
seconds* are always inserted at midnight UTC and there is no
timezone in which this *time of day* is midnight UTC, this *time of day*
could not arise in practice and therefore *conformant* applications
*must not* generate such a *time of day*.  *Conformant* applications
*must* accept such *times of day* but *may* subtract one second to
convert it to "`12:56:59.800`".

{.note}  [GEDCOM 5.5.1] makes no mention of *leap seconds*, but existing
applications are likely to generate such *times of day* if they happen
to save a file during the inserted *leap second*.  *Leap seconds* are
also supported by [ISO 8601], but not in the `xsd:time` *datatype*
defined in [XSD Pt2].  These rules allow compatibility with these
standards and with existing use, while also allowing applications to
ignore the *leap second*.

The *lexical space* of the `elf:Time` *datatype* allows the inclusion of
a **time zone designator** matching the `TZD` production.  *Conformant*
applications *must* accept *time zone designators* on *dates* in input,
but *should* ignore them and *may* remove them.  *Conformant*
applications *must not* include *time zone designators* on newly
generated *times of day*.

{.note}  Syntactic support for *time zone designators* is an extention to
[GEDCOM 5.5.1], and is included in ELF for forwards compatibility. This
standard does not specify the meaning conveyed by a *time zone
designator*, but the syntax used is compatible with [ISO 8601] and the
`xsd:time` *datatype* defined in [XSD Pt2], and a future version of this
standard is likely to define it by reference to the latter standard.  
Application choosing not to ignore *time zone designators* are
encouraged to follow [XSD Pt2].

Formally, the `elf:Time` *datatype* is a *structured non-language-tagged
datatype* which has the following *properties*:

: Datatype definition

------           -----------------------------------------------
Name             `https://terms.fhiso.org/elf/Time`
Type             `http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#Datatype`
Pattern          `(([01][0-9]|2[0-3]):[0-5][0-9](:([0-5][0-9]|60)(\.[0-9]+)?)?`
                 `|24:00:00(\.0+)?)(Z|(\+|-)([01][0-9]|2[0-3]):[0-5][0-9])?`
Supertype        *No non-trivial supertypes*
Abstract         `false`
------           -----------------------------------------------

{.note} The *pattern* in the table above has been split on to two
lines for convenience of presentation; it is, however, really one
*pattern* and contains no *whitespace* or line breaks.
really one single line.  Any functional difference between the `Time`
production and the *pattern* specified above is unintentional.

## The `elf:Age` datatype                                         {#age}

The **age** of a living individual is defined as the *duration* which
has elapsed since the *instant* of their birth.  

{.note}  It is normal to stop counting *age* at the *instant* of an
individual's death, therefore an *age* given for a posthumous event such
as a burial is likely to be the *age* of the person when they died, i.e.
the *duration* of the *time interval* from birth to death, rather than
from birth to burial.

The `elf:Age` *datatype* is used to represent *ages* in ELF, which it
does by recording number of *calendar years*, *calendar months* and
*calendar days* to have elapsed during the *duration*.

The *lexical space* of this *datatype* is the set of *strings*
which match the following `Age` production:

    Age      ::= ( [<>] S? )? ( Duration | BareYear ) | AgeWord

    Duration ::= [0-9]+ "y" ( S? [0-9]+ "m" )? ( S? [0-9]+ "d")?
                 | [0-9]+ "m" ( S? [0-9]+ "d" )? | [0-9]+ "d"
    BareYear ::= [0-9]+
    AgeWord  ::= "CHILD" | "INFANT" | "STILLBORN"

{.note}  These productions are case-sensitive, so the *string* "`17y`"
matches the `Duration` production, while "`17Y`" does not.

{.note}  Because the `elf:Age` *datatype* is currently only used in ELF
in contexts where *whitespace normalisation* has been carried out, the
`S` production will only ever match exactly one space *character*.

A *conformant* application serialising an *age* using this *datatype*
*should* use a single space *character* (U+0020) wherever *whitespace* is
permitted in the `Age` production.

{.note}  [GEDCOM 5.5.1] under-specifies how *whitespace* is allowed in
*ages*.  The `Age` production is permissive in its treatment of
*whitespace*, including allowing it to be omitted entirely.  The
preceding recommendation is intended to make *conformant* ELF
applications maximally compliant with current GEDCOM implementations
which typically use a single space *character*.

An *age* which uses the `elf:Age` *datatype* *shall* either consist of a
quantitative *duration* conforming to the `Duration` or `BareYear`
productions, or an qualitative *age* keyword conforming to the `AgeWord`
production.

When an *age* is a quantitative *duration* matching the `Duration`
production, it *shall* contain one, two or three integers, each
followed by a "`y`", "`m`" or "`d`" suffix to denote a number of
*calendar years*, *calendar months* or *calendar days*, respectively,
the sum of which is the *age*.

{.example} The *age* "`15y 2m`" represents a *duration* of 15 years and
2 months.  

If there is only a number of *calendar years* present, the `BareYear`
production allows the "`y`" suffix to be omitted, though this is 
*not recommended*.

{.example} The *age* "`42y`" only specifies a number of *calendar years*
and so can be written "`42`" without the "`y`" suffix.  The *age* "`15y
2m`" *must not* be written "`15 2m`" as this *duration* includes both a
number of *calendar years* and *calendar months*.

{.note ...} Allowing the "`y`" suffix to be omitted as shown in the
`Duration` production is a change from [GEDCOM 5.5.1] where it was
*required*.  This has been relaxed because GEDCOM files fairly commonly
contain lines like the following, despite them being illegal:

    2 AGE 58
{/}

An *age* which is written including a (possibly zero) number of
*calendar days* *may* be presumed to have a *precision* of a few
*calendar days*; an *age* which includes a (possibly zero) number of
*calendar months*, but no explicit number of *calendar days*, *may* be
presumed to have a *precision* of a few *calendar months*; an *age*
containing only a number of *calendar years* *may* be presumed to have a
*precision* of a few *calendar years*.

{.example ...}  The *age* "`40y`" *may* be assumed to have a *precision*
of a few years.  The actual *precision* will depend on context.  In many
situations the *precision* will be exactly one year, and so assuming the
*age* has been given correctly, the individual was born at least 40
years ago but not as long as 41 years ago.  

At other times, a lower *precision* may apply.  For example, on the 1841
census of Britain, adults were asked to round their *age* down to the
previous multiple of five years.  In such a context, an *age* of "`40y`"
means the individual was born at least 40 years ago but not as long
as 45 years ago.  As ELF does not provide a means of stating a range of
years in an *age*, nor of explicitly stating the *precision*, an *age*
recorded as "40" on the 1841 census *should* be encoded in ELF as
"`40y`".
{/}

The precise meaning of an *age* which is quantitative *duration* is
dependent on context, cultural considerations and the *calendar* in use.

{.example}  The previous example gave an example of how the
interpretation of "`40y`" depended on context, due to different
*precisions*.

{.example}  An elderly person reckoning their age using the Islamic 
calendar could consider their age in years to be several years greater 
than if they were reckoning their age using the Gregorian calendar
because the Islamic *calendar year* is around 11 *calendar days* shorter
than the Gregorian *calendar year*.  ELF does not provide a means of
specifying which *calendar* was used when recording an *age*.

{.note}  A future version of ELF may add facilities to specify which
*calendar* is being used for *ages* and also to allow an explicit
*precision* to be stated, for example to say that an *age* has been
given within a five-year *age* bracket.

*Ages* *should* generally be rounded down when expressed using just a
number of *calendar years*, or using a number *calendar years* and
*calendar months*, but an application *should not* assume this is
necessarily the case without additional information or context.

{.example}  In many parts of East Asia, *ages* are rounded up rather
than down, so a newborn infant is considered to be one year old, and
becomes two years old on the first anniversary of their birth.

A *conformant* application *may* remove any leading zeros preceding a
non-zero digit, change how *whitespace* is used in an *age*, or append
any omitted "`y`" suffix, but *must not* otherwise alter the *age*.
In particular, applications *must not* insert or remove zero components,
except as allowed below, nor convert between days, months and years.  

{.example} "`2y 0m`", "`2y`" and "`24m`" are all distinct *ages* and
applications *must not* rewrite one to another. However a *conformant*
application *may* convert "`2`" to "`2y`", adding the "`y`" suffix;
*may* convert "`02y`" to "`2y`", removing leading zero; and *may*
convert "`2y0m`" to "`2y 0m`", a simple change in *whitespace*.

In addition, a *conformant* application *may* insert or remove 
components which are the number zero followed by "`y`", "`m`" or "`d`"
suffix, providing doing so does not alter the presumed *precision* of
the *age*.

{.example ...}  The *ages* "`2y 0m`" and "`2y`" are presumed to have
different *precisions*: the former has a *precision* of a few months,
while the latter has a *precision* of a few years.  Converting one to
the other by inserting or removing a "`0m`" component would change the
*precision* of the *age*, and of this reason a *conformant* application
*must not* do it.   

However it is only the least significant component present (representing
the smallest unit of duration) which affects the *precision*, and other
zero components *may* be inserted or removed.  For example, "`2m`" and
"`0y 2m`" are equivalent in ELF, and applications *may* convert either
one to the other.
{/}

*Ages* which are quantitative *durations* *may* be prefixed with with a
"`<`" or a "`>`".  These are interpreted as meaning the individual is
at most the specified *age*, or is at least the specified *age*,
respectively.

{.note ...} This means the "`<`" and "`>`" token are actually interpreted
as ≤ and ≥ operators, though in practice the *precision* of *ages* in
ELF is such that difference between ≤ and <, or between ≥ and > does not
matter.

In common usage, a person may be said to over 21 as soon as they've had
their 21st birthday, at which point they would normally round their age
down to 21.  ELF allows for this usage, and "`> 21y`" may be used to
refer to someone whose *age* is exactly 21.  This may seem to be a
deviation from [GEDCOM 5.5.1] which defines them as meaning less than or
greater than the specified *age*, respectively, but because of the
uncertainty in the intended *precision* of an *age*, there is little
practical difference.  
The case for interpreting "`<`" as less than or equal to is weaker,
but there are examples in current GEDCOM files where "`<`" has been used
on *ages* inferred from an *age* given a few months later.
{/}  

{.example} If a source gives an individual's *age* as 52 in
March, their *age* might be inferred to be "`< 52y`" the preceding
January.  In practice, they might be 51 or 52, assuming the source is
*accurate*.  However, it is normally best not to infer *ages* and only
to record *ages* when they are given in sources.

Instead of a quantitative *duration*, an *age* *may* be expressed
qualitatively using an **age word** which matches the `AgeWord`
production.  This standard defines three *age words*: `CHILD`, `INFANT`
and `STILLBORN`.  These *should* be used when a source describes an
individual as a child, an infant, or stillborn, respectively, or
using other words which are broadly equivalent.  They *should not* be
used when a source describes an individual using a quantitative *age*.  

{.note}  The words "child", "infant" and "stillborn" can be considered
societal roles which are to some extent culturally dependent, rather
than well-defined *age* brackets.  A modern source might describe a
15-year-old as a child, while in mediæval times, a person of this age
would be working and unlikely to be described as a child.  This standard
does not therefore put firm limits on the *ages* meant by these terms.
This is a deviation from [GEDCOM 5.5.1] which states that a child is
less than 8 years old, an infant is less than 1 year old, and a
stillborn individual is approximately 0 days old.  Nevertheless, these
ages may be useful in deciding whether a foreign word or phrase can
reasonably be translated as one of these word.

The *age word* `STILLBORN` is not only a statement of *age* but also
conveys the fact that the individual died just prior to, at, or
immediately after the time of birth.  This *age word* *must not* be used
to refer to infants whose *age* is about 0 days unless they died around
the time of birth.

{.ednote}  Having exactly three *age words* seems unsatisfactory as it
fails to cope with other descriptions that might occur in a source,
such as "elderly".  The TSC have discussed whether *age words* should be
deprecated, or whether they should be developed into a more general and
extensible *age word* mechanism, but have reached no conclusion so far.

Formally, the `elf:Age` *datatype* is a *structured non-language-tagged
datatype* which has the following *properties*:

: Datatype definition

------           -----------------------------------------------
Name             `https://terms.fhiso.org/elf/Age`
Type             `http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#Datatype`
Pattern          `([<>][ \t\r\n]*)?([0-9]+|[0-9]+y([ \t\r\n]*[0-9]+m)?`
                 `([ \t\r\n]*[0-9]+d)?|[0-9]+m([ \t\r\n]*[0-9]+d)?|[0-9]+d)`
                 `|CHILD|INFANT|STILLBORN`
Supertype        *No non-trivial supertypes*
Abstract         `false`
------           -----------------------------------------------

{.note} The *pattern* in the table above has been split on to three
lines for convenience of presentation; it is, however, really one
*pattern* and contains no *whitespace* or line breaks.
Any functional difference between the `Age` production and the *pattern*
specified above is unintentional.

{.ednote} Depending on the details of how the ELF data model is
specified, it may make sense to split this into two *datatypes*: the
`elf:Age` *datatype* which would be restricted to just quantitative
*ages* and would therefore serve as a general *duration* datatype, and
a separate `elf:AgeWord` *datatype*.  
The various ELF structures having an `elf:Age` *payload* would then be
changed to have *payloads* which were a *union of datatypes*.  This
introduces several technical complications, including the need make
*datatype correction* work with multiple *default datatypes*.  In
principle this works fine when the *default datatypes* have disjoint
*lexical spaces*, as they would here, but it would need careful
specification.

## References

### Normative references

[Basic Concepts]
:   FHISO (Family History Information Standards Organisation).
    *Basic Concepts for Genealogical Standards*.  First public draft.
    (See <https://fhiso.org/TR/basic-concepts>.)

[RFC 2119]
:   IETF (Internet Engineering Task Force).
    *RFC 2119:
    Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels.*
    Scott Bradner, 1997.
    (See <http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119>.)

[XML]
:   W3C (World Wide Web Consortium).
    *Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.1*, 2nd edition.
    Tim Bray, Jean Paoli, C. M. Sperberg-McQueen, Eve Maler, François Yergeau, 
    and John Cowan eds., 2006.  W3C Recommendation.
    (See <https://www.w3.org/TR/xml11/>.)

### Other references

[ELF Data Model]
:   FHISO (Family History Information Standards Organisation).
    *Extended Legacy Format (ELF): Data Model*.  Exploratory draft.

[ELF Serialisation]
:   FHISO (Family History Information Standards Organisation).
    *Extended Legacy Format (ELF): Serialisation Format*.  Exploratory draft.

[GEDCOM 5.3]
:   The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
    *The GEDCOM Standard*, draft release 5.3.  4 Nov 1993.

[GEDCOM 5.5]
:   The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
    *The GEDCOM Standard*, release 5.5.  2 Jan 1996, as amended by the
    errata sheet dated 10 Jan 1996.

[GEDCOM 5.5.1]
:   The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
    *The GEDCOM Standard*, draft release 5.5.1.  2 Oct 1999.

[GEDCOM X Dates]
:    Intellectual Reserve Inc.  *The GEDCOM X Date Format*.
     Stable draft, accessed December 2018.  (See <http://gedcomx.org/>.)

[ISO 8601]
:   ISO (International Organization for Standardization).  *ISO
    8601:2004.  Data elements and interchange formats — Information
    interchange — Representation of dates and times*.  2004.

[ISO 8601-2]
:   ISO (International Organization for Standardization).  *ISO
    8601-2:2009.  Data elements and interchange formats — Information
    interchange — Part 2: Extensions*.  Draft, 15 Feb 2016.

[FHISO Patterns]
:   FHISO (Family History Information Standards Organisation).
    *The Pattern Datatype*.  First public draft.
    (See <https://fhiso.org/TR/patterns>.)

[Roman Dates]
:   Chris Bennett. "Roman Dates."  Website, accessed October 2019.  
    (See <http://www.instonebrewer.com/TyndaleSites/Egypt/ptolemies/chron/chronology.htm>.)
    Last updated 2012.

[XSD Pt2]
:   W3C (World Wide Web Consortium). *W3C XML Schema Definition Language 
    (XSD) 1.1 Part 2: Datatypes*.  David Peterson, Shudi Gao (高殊镝),
    Ashok Malhotra, C. M. Sperberg-McQueen and Henry S. Thompson, ed., 2012.
    W3C Recommendation.  (See <https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema11-2/>.)

[Triples Discovery]
:   FHISO (Family History Information Standards Organisation).
    *Simple Triples Discovery Mechanism*.  First public draft.
    (See <https://fhiso.org/TR/triples-discovery>.)

\vfill

----
Copyright © 2018–19, [Family History Information Standards Organisation,
Inc](https://fhiso.org/).
The text of this standard is available under the
[Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

