---
title: "Extended Legacy Format (ELF)"
subtitle: Serialisation Format
date: 31 October 2019
numbersections: true
...

# Extended Legacy Format (ELF):<br/> Serialisation Format

{.ednote ...} This is an **exploratory draft** of the serialisation
format for FHISO's proposed suite of Extended Legacy Format (ELF)
standards.  This document is not endorsed by the FHISO membership, and
may be updated, replaced or obsoleted by other documents at any time.

Comments on this draft should be directed to the
[tsc-public@fhiso.org](http://tech.fhiso.org/tsc-public) mailing list.
{/}

FHISO's **Extended Legacy Format** (or **ELF**) is a hierarchical
serialisation format and genealogical data model that is fully
compatible with GEDCOM, but with the addition of a structured
extensibility mechanism.  It also clarifies some ambiguities that were
present in GEDCOM and documents best current practice. 

The **GEDCOM** file format developed by The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints is the *de facto* standard for the exchange of
genealogical data between applications and data providers.  Its most
recent version is GEDCOM 5.5.1 which was produced in 1999, but despite
many technological advances since then, GEDCOM has remained unchanged.

{.note} Strictly, [GEDCOM 5.5] was the last version to be publicly
released back in 1995.  However a draft dated 2 October 1999 of a
proposed [GEDCOM 5.5.1] was made public; it is generally considered to
have the status of a standard and has been widely implemented as such.

FHISO are undertaking a program of work to produce a modernised yet
backward-compatible reformulation of GEDCOM under the name ELF, the new
name having been chosen to avoid confusion with any other updates or
extensions to GEDCOM, or any future use of the name by The Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.  This document is one of five that
form the initial suite of ELF standards, known collectively as ELF
1.0.0:

* **ELF: Primer**.  This is not a formal standard, but is being
  released alongside the ELF standards to provide a broad overview of
  ELF written in a less formal style.  It gives particular emphasis to
  how ELF differs from GEDCOM.

* **ELF: Serialisation Format**.  This standard defines a
  general-purpose serialisation format based on the GEDCOM data format
  which encodes a dataset as a hierarchical series of lines, and
  provides low-level facilities such as escaping.

* **ELF: Schemas**.  This standard defines flexible extensibility and
  validation mechanisms on top of the serialisation layer.  Although it
  is an *optional* component of ELF 1.0.0, future ELF extensions to ELF
  will be defined using ELF schemas.

* **ELF: Date, Age and Time Microformats**.  This standard defines
  microformats for representing dates, ages and times in arbitrary calendars,
  together with how they are applied to the Gregorian, Julian, French
  Republican and Hebrew calendars.  

* **ELF: Data Model**.  This standard defines a data model based on the
  lineage-linked GEDCOM form, reformulated to be usable with the ELF
  serialisation model and schemas.  It is not a major update to the
  GEDCOM data model, but rather a basis for future extension and
  revision.

## Conventions used

Where this standard gives a specific technical meaning to a word or
phrase, that word or phrase is formatted in bold text in its initial
definition, and in italics when used elsewhere.
The key words **must**, **must not**, **required**, **shall**, 
**shall not**, **should**, **should not**, **recommended**,
**not recommended**, **may** and **optional** in this standard are to be
interpreted as described in
&#x5B;[RFC 2119](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119)].

An application is **conformant** with this standard if and only if it
obeys all the requirements and prohibitions contained in this
document, as indicated by use of the words *must*, *must not*,
*required*, *shall* and *shall not*, and the relevant parts of its
normative references.  Standards referencing this standard *must not*
loosen any of the requirements and prohibitions made by this standard,
nor place additional requirements or prohibitions on the constructs
defined herein.  

{.note} Derived standards are not allowed to add or remove requirements
or prohibitions on the facilities defined herein so as to preserve
interoperability between applications.  Data generated by one
*conformant* application must always be acceptable to another
*conformant* application, regardless of what additional standards each
may conform to. 

This standard depends on FHISO's **Basic Concepts for Genealogical
Standards** standard.  To be *conformant* with this standard, an
application *must* also be *conformant* with the referenced parts of
[Basic Concepts].  Concepts defined in that standard are used here
without further definition.

{.note} In particular, precise meaning of *character*, *code point*,
*string*, *whitespace*, *whitespace normalisation*, *line break*, *line
break normalisation*, *language tag* and *langauge-tagged string* are
given in [Basic Concepts].  The word *tag* is defined in [Basic
Concepts], but this standard does not make use of that definition and
uses the word for an unrelated concept defined in {§tags}.

Certain facilities in this standard are described as **deprecated**,
which is a warning that they are likely to be removed from a future
version of this standard.  This has no bearing on whether a *conformant*
application must implement the facility: they may be *required*,
*recommended* or *optional* as described in this standard.  

Indented text in grey or coloured boxes does not form a normative part
of this standard, and is labelled as either an example or a note.  

{.ednote} Editorial notes, such as this, are used to record outstanding
issues, or points where there is not yet consensus; they will be
resolved and removed for the final standard.  Examples and notes will be
retained in the standard.

The grammar given here uses the form of EBNF notation defined in §6 of
&#x5B;[XML](https://www.w3.org/TR/xml11/)], except that no significance is
attached to the capitalisation of grammar symbols.  *Conforming*
applications *must not* generate data not conforming to the syntax given
here, but non-conforming syntax *may* be accepted and processed by a
*conforming* application in an implementation-defined manner, providing
a warning is issued to the user, except where this standard says
otherwise.

{.note} In this form of EBNF, *whitespace* is only permitted where it
is explicitly stated in the grammar.  It is not automatically permitted
between arbitrary tokens in the grammar.

The grammar productions in this standard uses the `S` and `Char`
productions defined in §2 of [Basic Concepts] to match any non-empty
sequence of *whitespace* *characters* or any valid *character*,
respectively.

## Overview                                                        {#overview}

The ELF serialisation format is a structured, line-based text format for
encoding data in a hierarchical manner that is both machine-readable and
human-readable.  

At a logical level, an ELF document is built from **structures**, the name
ELF gives to the basic hierarchical data structures used to represent
data.  ELF uses two types of *structure*: *tagged structures* and *typed
structures*.  The serialisation layer described in this standard
only deals with *tagged structures*, and the word *structure* is
frequently used in this document to refer to what is properly a *tagged
structure*.

A **tagged structure** consists of:

*  an *optional* *cross-reference identifier* used to identify the
   *structure* within the document; 
*  a *tag*, which is a *string* encoding the meaning of the *structure*;
*  an *optional* *payload*, which can be considered the value of the
   *structure*; and
*  a sequence of zero or more child *structures* known as its
   *substructures*.  These can nest arbitrarily deep in a hierarchical
   manner.

{.note}  This maps quite closely, though not perfectly, to a standard
entity–attribute–value model.  In a *structure* with one or more
*substructures*, the parent *structure* serves as the entity being
described, and its *substructures* each encode an attribute–value pair.   
In a *structure* with a *payload*, the *tag* and *payload*
function in as an attribute–value pairs, with the *tag* identifying the
particular piece of information being recorded and the *payload* being
its value.  It is normal for a *structure* to either have a *payload* or
*substructures*, but not both; however this not a requirement of ELF,
and the [ELF Data Model] contains several *structures* where this is not
true.  The `FAMC` *structure* is an example.  Such *structures* do not
neatly fit into the entity–attribute–value paradigm.

The *tag* describes how the *structure* is to be interpreted, and
*structures* are commonly referred to by their *tag* in this standard.

{.example}  A *structure* whose *tag* is the *string* "`NOTE`" will
often be called a `NOTE` *structure*.

{.note} This standard defines a small number of *tags* which are used for
recording data needed by at the serialisation layer to correctly
interpret an ELF document.  The [ELF Data Model] defines a large set of
*tags* for use in recording genealogical data in a GEDCOM-compatible
manner.   However ELF is a general-purpose data format that can be used
to represent arbitrary data; [ELF Schemas] provides a mechanism for
defining *tags* for other purposes, including to extend the [ELF Data
Model].

The *payload* is either a *language-tagged string* or a *pointer* to
another *structure*.  A *payload* which is a *language-tagged string* is
referred to as a **string payload**.

{.note}  A *language-tagged string* is defined in §3.1 of [Basic
Concepts] as a *string* which is tagged with a *language tag*.  Making
the *payload* a *language-tagged string* rather than a plain
*string* is an extension to GEDCOM.  *Language tags* are defined in §3 of
[Basic Concepts].

{.example} A simple example *structure* might have a *tag* of "`AUTH`"
and a *payload* which is a *language-tagged string* consisting of the
*string* "`鈴木眞年`" tagged with the *language tag* `ja`.  The `AUTH`
*tag* is defined in [ELF Data Model] as meaning "the name of the primary
creator of the source", and 鈴木眞年 is the name of genealogist Suzuki
Matoshi, written in his native Japanese language, which is denoted by
the *language tag* `ja`.

When the *payload* of a *structure* is a *pointer*, this represents a
link between two *structures*, with the *pointer* in one *structure*
referencing the *cross-reference identifier* in a second *structure*.

{.note}  In this version of ELF, a *pointer* *must* have the same
lexical form as a *cross-reference identifier* used in the same
document.  Both [GEDCOM 5.5.1] and this ELF standard reserve syntax so
that a future standard may use *pointers* to reference *structures* in
other documents.

{.example}  The [ELF Data Model] uses *pointers* to form links between
family records denoted by the `FAM` *tag*, and individual records
denoted by the `INDI` *tag*.  These links are how genealogical
relationships are represented in ELF.  A `FAM` *structure* may contain a
`CHIL` *substructure* whose *payload* is a *pointer*.  Elsewhere in the
document, there will be an `INDI` *structure* whose *cross-reference
identifier* is identical to the *pointer* in the *payload* of the `CHIL`
*substructure* of the `FAMC` *structure*.  This is stating that the
person represented by the `INDI` *structure* is a child of the family
represented by the `FAM` *structure*.

A top-level *structure*, meaning a *structure* which is not a
*substructure* of any other *structure*, is called a **record**.  An ELF
document or **dataset** can have arbitrarily many *records*.

{.ednote}  This is either not strictly true or at least misleading,
because `HEAD` and `TRLR` are not *records*.  Probably.

{.note} The expressiveness of ELF is similar to that of XML.  ELF's
*structures* serve the same role as elements in XML, and nest similarly.
But unlike XML, which has a single root-level element, an ELF *dataset*
typically has multiple *records*.

At a lexical level, a *structure* is encoded as sequence of **lines**,
each terminated with a *line break*.  The first *line* encodes the
*cross-reference identifier*, *tag* and *payload* of the *structure*,
while any *substructures* are encoded in order on subsequent *lines*.
Each *line* consists of the following components, in order, separated by
*whitespace*:

*  a *level*, which is an *integer* that records how deeply the current
   *structure* is nested; 
*  the *optional* *cross-reference identifier* of the *structure* being
   encoded by the *line*;
*  the *tag* of the *structure* being encoded; and
*  the *optional* *payload* of the *structure*.

{.example ...}
    0 HEAD
    1 GEDC
    2 VERS 5.5.1
    2 ELF 1.0.0
    2 FORM LINEAGE-LINKED
    1 CHAR UTF-8
    0 INDI
    1 NAME Charlemagne
    0 TRLR

This ELF document has three *lines* with *level* `0` which mark the
start of the three top-level *structures* or *records*.  These *records*
have, respectively, three, one and zero *substructures*, which are
denoted by the *lines* with *level* `1`.   The *structure* represented
by the *line* with a `CHAR` *tag* is a *substructure* of the `HEAD`
*record* because there is no intervening *line* with *level* one less
than `1`; the *structure* represented by the `NAME` *line*
naming Charlemagne is a *substructure* of the `INDI` *record*, as that
is the preceding *line* with a *level* `0`.   The `TRLR` *record* is an
example of a *record* with no *substructures*.

Five of the *lines* in this example document have a *payload*.  For
example, the *payload* of the `FORM` *line* is the *string*
"`LINEAGE-LINKED`", while the *payload* of the `NAME` *line* is the
*string* "`Charlemagne`".  None of the *lines* in this example have
*payload* which are *pointers*, nor do any have a *cross-reference
identifier*.
{/}

### ELF applications                                           {#applications}

A *conformant* application which parses the ELF serialisation format is
called an **ELF parser**.  A *conformant* application which outputs data
in the ELF serialisation format is called an **ELF writer**.  

{.note} Many applications will be both *ELF parsers* and *ELF writers*.

The input to an *ELF parser* and output of an *ELF writer* is an **octet
stream**, which is a sequence of 8-bit bytes or **octets** each with a
value between 0 and 255.

{.note}  An *octet stream* is typically read from or written to a disk
or the network.  This standard does not define how these should be read,
nor how the *octets* are represented in storage or in transit on a
network.

This standard defines how an *octet stream* is parsed into a *dataset*,
and how a *dataset* is serialised into an *octet stream*.  Overviews of
these processes can be found in {§parsing} and {§serialising},
respectively.
An *octet stream* which this standard requires an *ELF parser* to be
able to read is called a **conformant source**.

{.note}  An *octet stream* which an *ELF parser* *must* be able to
read successfully, but can process in an implementation-defined manner
is nonetheless a *conformant source*.

An *octet stream* which is not a *conformant source* is called a
**non-conformant source**.  If the input to an *ELF parser* is not a
*conformant source*, unless this standard says otherwise, the
application *must* either terminate processing that *octet stream* or
present a warning or error message to the user.  If it continues
processing, it does so in an implementation-defined manner.

This standard also recognises a class of application which reads data in
the ELF serialisation format, applies a small number of changes to that
data, and immediately produces output in the ELF serialisation format
which is identical to the input, octet for octet, other than where the
requested changes have been made.  Such an application is called an
**ELF editor**.

{.note} *ELF editors* are intended to small programs or scripts that
apply simple modifications to *datasets*, typically with little or no
human interaction.  For example, script which replaces some particular
*deprecated* feature in the *dataset* with an equivalent would be an
*ELF editor*.  This definition of an *ELF editor* is not intended to
include large, feature-rich applications which read ELF into an internal
database, allow users to view and modify most aspects of the data, and
later export it as ELF.

*ELF editors* are not required to conform to the full requirements of an
*ELF parser* or *ELF writer*.  The only requirement this standard places
on *ELF editors* is that, when acting on a *conformant source*, they
*must* either generate output which is a *conformant source*, or present
a warning or error message to the user, or terminate.

{.note} This is a considerably weaker requirement than that placed
on *ELF parsers* and *ELF writers*.  In particular, there is no
requirement for an *ELF editor* to detect invalid input, as an *ELF
parser* is generally required to; nor do the stricter requirements on
the output allowed from *ELF writers* apply.  These relaxations allow
*ELF editors* to do in-place editing of the *octet stream*, without
fully parsing those parts of their input which are not going to be
changed.

This standard has an *optional* dependency on the [ELF Schemas]
standard, which provides additional functionality for validating ELF
documents and extending the ELF data model.  An application which
conforms to the [ELF Schemas] standard is described as **schema-aware**;
other applications are described as **non-schema-aware**.

### Parsing                                                         {#parsing}
    
The parsing process can be summarised as follows:

1. An *octet stream* is converted to a sequence of *line strings* by:

    a. determining its *character encoding* by 
    
        i.  identifying the *detected character encoding* per 
            {§detected-enc}, and 
        ii. using that *detected character encoding* to look for a
            *specified character encoding* in the *serialisation
            metadata* per {§specified-enc};
    
    b. converting *octets* to *characters* using that *character
       encoding*; and
    c. splitting on *line breaks* per {§line-strings}.

2. *Line strings* are converted into *records* by:

    a. parsing *line strings* into *lines* per {§lines};
    b. assembling *lines* into *records*, each of which are hierarchies
       of *tagged structures*, as described in {§first-pass}.

3. The *header record* is parsed for *serialisation metadata* per
   {§parsing-metadata}.

4. A second pass is made recursively over each *record*, processing it
   per {§second-pass}:

    a. if the parser is *schema-aware*, converting *tagged structures*
       into *typed structures*, as described in [ELF Schemas]; and 

    b. each *string payload* is unescaped by:

        i.   identifying all *escaped at signs* and *escape sequences*
             per {§identify-escs};
        ii.  verifying that each *escape sequence* is a *permitted
             escape* per {§permitted-escs}; 
        iii. replacing each *escaped at sign* with a single "at" sign; 
        iv.  replacing each *Unicode escape* with the *character* it
             encodes per {§unicode-escape}; and
        v.   merging *continuation lines* per {§merge-conts}.


### Serialisation                                               {#serialising}

The semantics of serialisation are defined by the following procedural outline.

2. The *tagged structures* are ordered and additional *tagged structures* created to represent *serialisation metadata*.
    
    This step cannot happen before tagging because tagging may generate *serialisation metadata* that needs to be included in the *tagged structures*.

3. Payloads are converted to create *xref structures* by simultaneously
    
    - assigning *xref_ids* and replacing *pointer*-valued *payloads* with *string*-valued *xrefs*
    - escaping `@` *characters*
    - preserving valid *escapes*
    - escaping unrepresentable *characters*
    
    Semantically, these actions must happen concurrently because none of them should be applied to the others' results.
    
    This step cannot happen before tagging because tags are needed to determine the set of valid *escapes*.
    This step cannot happen before adding *serialisation metadata* because it is applied to the *serialisation metadata* as well.

4. The *dataset* is converted to a sequence of *lines* by

    - assigning *levels*
    - splitting *payloads*, if needed, using `CONT` and `CONC`
    - ordering *substructures* in a preorder traversal of the *tagged structures*
    
    This step cannot happen before payload conversion because valid split points are dependant on proper escaping.
    This step must happen before encoding as octets because valid split points are determined by *character*, not octet.

5. The sequence of *lines* is converted to an octet stream by

    - concatenating the *lines* with *line-break* terminators
    - converting *strings* to octets using the *character encoding*


### Glossary                                                       {#glossary}

{.ednote}  *Record* and *structure* are now defined in {§overview},
while *character encoding* is defined in {§parsing-linestrs}.  *Dataset*
and *document* are very nearly defined in {§overview} too, but we don't
currently discuss *metadata* there &mdash; this is an issue which needs
resolving.

Dataset
:   *Metadata* and a *document*.

Document
:   An unordered set of *structures*.

Metadata
:   A collections of *structures* intended to describe information about the dataset as a whole.
    
    The relative order of *structures* with the same *structure type identifier* SHALL be preserved within this collection;
    the relative order of *structures* with distinct *structure type identifiers* is not defined by this specification.

ELF Schema
:   Information needed to correctly parse *tagged structures* into *structures*:
    a mapping between *structure type identifiers* and *tags*
    and metadata relating to valid *escapes* and *prefixes*.

Serialisation Metadata
:   *Tagged structures* inserted during serialisation
    and removed (with all its *substructures*) during parsing.
    They are used to serialise the *character encoding* and *ELF schema*
    as well as to separate the *metadata* and the *document*.

Structure
:   - A **structure type identifier**, which is a *term*.
    - Optionally, a **payload** which is one of
        - A **pointer** to another *structure*, which *must* be a *record* within the same *dataset*.
        - A *string* or subtype thereof.
    - One **superstructure**, which is one of
        - Another *structure*; *superstructure* links MUST be acyclic.
        - The *document*.
        - The *metadata*.
    - A collection of any number of **substructures**, which are *structures*.

        The relative order of *structures* with the same *structure type identifier* SHALL be preserved within this collection;
        the relative order of *structures* with distinct *structure type identifiers* is not defined by this specification.

## Parsing and serialising line strings                    {#parsing-linestrs}

In order to parse an ELF document, an *ELF parser* *shall* first convert
the *octet stream* into a sequence of **line strings**, which are
*strings* containing the unparsed lexical representations of *lines*.

The way in which *octets* are mapped to *characters* is called the
**character encoding** of the document.  ELF supports several different
*character encodings*.  Determining which is used is a two-stage
process, with the first stage being to determine the **detected
character encoding** of the *octet stream* per {§detected-enc}.
Frequently there will be no *detected character encoding*.  

{.note}  The purpose of this step is twofold: first, it allows
non-ASCII-compatible *character encodings* like UTF-16 to be supported;
and secondly, it removes any byte-order mark that might be present in
the *octet stream*.

Next, the initial portion of the *octet stream* is converted to
*characters* using the *detected character encoding*, failing which in
an ASCII-compatible manner.  This *character* sequence is then scanned
for a `CHAR` *line* whose *payload* identifies the **specified character
encoding**.  This process is described in {§specified-enc}.  If there is
a *specified character encoding*, it is used as the *character encoding*
for the ELF document; otherwise the *detected character encoding* is
used, failing which the default is the ANSEL *character encoding*.
Considerations for reading specific *character encodings* can be found
in {§encodings}.

Once the *character encoding* is determined, the *octet stream* can be
converted into a sequence of *characters* which are assembled into *line
strings* as described in {§line-strings}.  The process of serialising a
*line string* back into an *octet stream* is far simpler as the intended
*character encoding* is already known; this process is described in
{§serialising-line-strings}.

### Detecting a character encoding                             {#detected-enc}

{.note} For applications that choose not to support the *optional*
UTF-16 *character encoding*, the process described in this section can
be as simple as skipping over a UTF-8 byte-order mark, and determining
the *detected character encoding* to be UTF-8 if a byte-order mark was
present.

If a *character encoding* is specified via any supported external means,
such as an HTTP `Content-Type` header, this *should* be taken as to be
the *detected character encoding*.

{.example ...}  Suppose the ELF file was download using HTTP and the
response included this header:

    Content-Type: text/plain; charset=UTF-8

If an application supports taking the *detected character encoding* from
an HTTP `Content-Type` header, the *detected character encoding*
*should* be UTF-8.

Note that the use of the MIME type `text/plain` is *not recommended* for
ELF.  It is used here purely as an example. 
{/}

Otherwise, if the *octet stream* begins with a byte-order mark (U+FEFF)
encoded in UTF-8, the *detected character encoding* *shall* be UTF-8; or
if the application supports the *optional* UTF-16 encoding and the
*octet steam* begins with a byte-order mark encoded in UTF-16 of either
endianness, the *detected character encoding* *shall* be UTF-16 of the
appropriate endianness.  The byte-order mark *shall* be removed from the
*octet stream* before further processing.

Otherwise, if the application supports the *optional* UTF-16 encoding
and the *octet stream* begins with any ASCII *character* (U+0001 to
U+007F) encoded in UTF-16 of either endianness, this encoding *shall* be
the *detected character encoding*. 

{.example} ELF files typically begin with the *character* "`0`".  In
the big endian form of UTF-16, sometimes called UTF-16BE, this is
encoded with the hexadecimal *octets* `00 30`.  These two *octets* will
be detected as an ASCII *character* encoded in UTF-16, and the *detected
charcter encoding* will be determined to be UTF-16BE.

Otherwise, applications *may* try to detect other encodings by examining
the *octet stream* in an implementation-defined manner, but this is 
*not recommended*.

{.note}  One situation where it might be necessary to try to detect
another encoding is if the application needs to support (as an
extension) a *character encoding* like EBCDIC or UTF-32 which is not
compatible with ASCII.

Otherwise, there is no *detected character encoding*.

{.note ...} In this case, for the *octet stream* to be understood, it
must use a 7- or 8-bit *character encoding* that is sufficiently
compatible with ASCII that the `CHAR` *line* can be read.  The only 7 or
8-bit *character encodings* defined in this standard are ASCII, ANSEL
and UTF-8 which encode ASCII *characters* identically.  These will all
be understood correctly if there is no *detected character encoding*.

Some *character encodings* with minor differences from ASCII can also be
understood correctly.  An example is the Japanese Shift-JIS *character
encoding* which uses the *octets* 5C and 7E to encode the yen currency
sign (U+00A5) and overline *character* (U+203E) where ASCII has a
backslash (U+005C) and tilde (U+007E).  An application does not need to
understand these *characters* in order to scan for a `CHAR` *line*.
{/}

{.note ...} These cases can be summarised as follows, where `xx` denotes
any *octet* with a hexadecimal value between `01` and `7F`, inclusive:

----------------  -------------------------------------------------
Initial octets    Detected character encoding
----------------  -------------------------------------------------
`EF BB BF`        UTF-8, with byte-order mark

`FF FE`           UTF-16, little endian, with byte-order mark

`FE FF`           UTF-16, big endian, with byte-order mark

`xx 00`           UTF-16, little endian, without byte-order mark

`00 xx`           UTF-16, big endian, without byte-order mark

Otherwise         None
----------------  -------------------------------------------------
{/}

### Specified character encodings                             {#specified-enc}

To determine the *specified character encoding*, the initial portion of
the *octet stream* *shall* temporarily be converted to *characters*
using the *detected character encoding*.  

If there is no *detected character encoding*, the application *shall*
convert each *octet* to the *character* whose *code point* is the value
of *octet*.  An application *shall* issue an error and stop processing
the *octet stream* if the null *octet* `00` is encountered.  *Restricted
characters*, as defined in §2.3 of [Basic Concepts], *may* be handled in
an implementation-defined manner.

{.note}  This is equivalent to using the ISO-8859-1 *character encoding*
if there is no *detected character encoding*.  As defined in §2 of
[Basic Concepts], *code point* U+0000 is not a *character*.  In
principle, the *octet* `00` might occur in the representation of a valid
*character* in some *character encoding*, but almost all *character
encodings* avoid this and it cannot happen in the ASCII, ANSEL or UTF-8
*character encodings*.  

*Characters* from the initial portion of the *octet stream* are
parsed into *lines strings* as described in {§line-strings}.  Each
*line string* is *whitespace normalised* as described in §2.1 of [Basic
Concepts], and all lowercase ASCII *characters* (U+0061 to U+007A)
converted to the corresponding uppercase *characters* (U+0041 to
U+005A).

{.note} *Whitespace normalisation* and conversion to uppercase only
applies for the purpose of determining the *specified character set*.
Neither process is otherwise applied to all *line strings*.  It is done
here to simplify scanning for the *specified character set*, but without
requiring full parsing of *line strings* into a *lines*, which might
result in errors if the actual *character encoding* differs from the one
being used provisionally while scanning for the *specified character
encoding*.

Once normalised in this manner, the first *line string* of the file
*must* be exactly "`0 HEAD`"; otherwise the application *must*
issue an error and cease parse the *octet stream* as ELF.  If
the application encounters a subsequent normalised *line string*
beginning with a `0` digit (U+0030) followed by a space *character*
(U+0020), the application *shall* stop scanning for a *specified
character encoding*.

{.note}  A *line string* beginning with a "`0`" encodes the start of the
next *record*, and therefore the end of the `HEAD` *record*.  The
*specified character encoding* is given in a `CHAR` *line* in the `HEAD`
*record*; a `CHAR` *line* found elsewhere in the file *must not* be used
to supply the *specified character encoding*.

If the application encounters a *line string* beginning with "`1 CHAR`"
followed by a space *character* (U+0020) while scanning for the
*specified character encoding*, then the remainder of the *line string*
*shall* be used to determine the *specified character encoding*.

If the remainder of the *line string* is exactly "`ASCII`", "`ANSEL`" or
"`UTF-8`", then the *specified character encoding* *shall* be ASCII,
ANSEL or UTF-8, respectively.

{.example ...}  It is *recommended* that all ELF documents use UTF-8 and
record this using a `CHAR` *line* as follows:

    0 HEAD
    1 CHAR UTF-8

This `CHAR` *line string* will be found while scanning for the
*specified character encoding*.  The *line string* begins with "`1
CHAR`" followed by a space *character*; the remainder of the *line
string* is "`UTF-8`" so the *specified character encoding* is recognised
as UTF-8.
{/}

Otherwise, if the remainder of the *line string* is exactly "`UNICODE`"
and the *detected character encoding* is UTF-16 in either endianness,
the *specified character encoding* *shall* be the UTF-16 in that
endianness.

{.note} [GEDCOM 5.5.1] says that the *string* "`UNICODE`" is used to
specify the UTF-16 encoding, though without naming the encoding as such,
and without specifying which endianness is meant.  If the *octet stream*
is a valid ELF document encoded in UTF-16 and the application supports
UTF-16, then the *detected character encoding* will have been determined
accordingly.

Otherwise, the application *may* determine the *specified character
encoding* from the remainder of the *line string* and the *detected
character encoding* in an implementation-defined way.  The application
*may* read one further *line string*, and if it begins with "`2 VERS`"
followed by a space *character* (U+0020), the application *may* also use
the remainder of that *line string* in determining the *specified
character encoding*.

{.example ...}  It is fairly common to find "`ANSI`" on the `CHAR`
*line*, though this has never been a legal option in any version of
GEDCOM.  It typically refers to one of several Windows code pages, most
frequently CP-1252 which was the Windows default code page for English
language installations and for several other Western European languages.
However other code pages exist, and an application localised for, say,
Hungarian might encode the file using CP-1250.  In principle a `VERS`
*line* could contain information to specify the particular code page
used, as in the following ELF fragment, but in practice this is rare.  

    0 HEAD
    1 CHAR ANSI
    2 VERS 1250
{/}

Otherwise, there is no *specified character encoding*.

If there is a *specified character encoding*, it *shall* be used as the
*character encoding* of the *octet stream*.  Otherwise, if there is a
*detected character encoding*, it *shall* be used as the *character
encoding* of the octet stream.  Otherwise, the *character encoding*
*shall* default to be ANSEL.

{.note}  ANSEL is the default *character encoding* for compatibility
with GEDCOM, despite being it being *deprecated* in ELF.

If the *character encoding* is one which the application does not
support, the application *shall* issue an error and stop reading the
file.

### Character encodings                                           {#encodings}

*ELF parsers* are *required* to support reading the ASCII, ANSEL and
UTF-8 *character encodings*.  *ELF writers* are only *required* to
support the UTF-8 *character encoding*.  Support for the UTF-16
*character encoding* is *optional*, and applications *may* support it in
either its big or little endian forms, both, or neither.  The
ASCII, ANSEL and UTF-16 *character encodings* are all *deprecated*.

{.ednote}  We considered making support for ANSEL *optional*, but after
researching  how frequently current GEDCOM files were encoded using
ANSEL (as opposed to claiming to be ANSEL but actually using the ASCII
subset of ANSEL), the TSC felt it had to be *required*.

The UTF-8 and UTF-16 *character encodings* are the Unicode encoding
forms defined in §9.2 of [ISO 10646], and the specifics of the big and
little endian forms of UTF-16 are defined in §9.3 of [ISO 10646].  

{.ednote} Work out whether we're going to cite ISO 10646 or the Unicode
standard, and get check the section numbers.  

{.note}  UTF-8 is a variable-width *character encoding* that uses
between one and four *octets* to encode a *character*.  It is backwards
compatible with ASCII, so ASCII *characters* are encoded to a single
*octet* and other *characters* require more.  For example, the Czech
given name "Miloš" is encoded using the *octet* sequence `4D 69 6C 6F C5
A1` where the last two *octets* encode the *character* "š".  Only
*characters* outside Unicode's Basic Multilingual Plane &mdash; that is
*characters* with a *code point* of U+10000 or higher &mdash; are
encoded with four *octets*.  An example is the ancient Chinese
*character* "𠀡" which is encoded using the *octets* `F0 A0 80 A1`.
Such *characters* can occasionally be found encoded using six *octets*
(e.g. `ED A1 80 ED B0 A1` for "𠀡").  This form, which is called CESU-8
and is not valid UTF-8, typically results from an incorrect
serialisation of UTF-16 data as UTF-8.  Input containing CESU-8 forms
but purporting to be UTF-8 is not a *conformant source*, however 
*ELF parsers* *may* read it providing they issue a warning to the user.
*ELF writers* *must not* generate CESU-8 when serialising data as UTF-8.

{.note}  UTF-16 is also a variable-width *character encoding* which
normally uses two *octets* to encode a *character*, but uses four
*octets* for *characters* outside the Basic Multilingual Plane.  When
only two *octets* are used, UTF-16 is identical to an earlier
fixed-width *character encoding* called UCS-2 which was unable to encode
*characters* outside the Basic Multilingual Plane.  *Conformant*
applications are *required* by §2 of [Basic Concepts] to support
*characters* outside the Basic Multilingual Plane, and therefore
applications which opt to support UTF-16 *must* ensure they do not
implement support for only UCS-2.

{.note}  As UTF-8 and UTF-16 are encodings of Unicode, they naturally
decode into a sequence of Unicode *characters* without requiring
conversion between character sets.

The *character encoding* referred to as ASCII in this standard is the US
version of ASCII which, for the purpose of this standard, is defined as
the subset of UTF-8 which uses only Unicode characters U+0001 to U+007F.

{.note} The US ASCII *character encoding* is normally defined in
[ASCII], but this standard defines it in terms of [ISO 10646].  This is
partly to avoid uncertainty over which of several incompatible
definitions of ASCII is meant, partly because the Unicode standard is
much more readily available than the ASCII one, and partly because ASCII
allows certain punctuation marks a be used as combining diacritics when
they follow the backspace *character* (U+0008).  This use of ASCII
combining diacritics is not included in [ISO 10646], and is forbidden in
both GEDCOM and ELF as the backspace *character* *must not* occur.
Unicode provides a separate set of combining diacritics which are
permitted in ELF.

ANSEL refers to the Extended Latin Alphabet Coded Character Set for
Bibliographic Use defined in [ANSEL].  If an ELF file is determined to
use the ANSEL *character encoding* it *must* be converted into a
sequence of Unicode *characters* before it can be processed further.
This is discussed in {§ansel}.

If other *character encodings* are supported, they too must be converted
into a sequence of Unicode *characters* for further processing.

{.note}  This standard makes no recommendation on how applications
should represent sequences of Unicode *characters* internally, and the
UTF-8, UTF-16 and UTF-32 *character encodings* each have advantages.

{.ednote}  This standard currently makes no distinction between a
*character set* and a *character encoding*, but arguably it would be
cleaner to make this distinction.  Then UTF-16 and UTF-8 are different
*character encodings* of the same Unicode *character set*, and ASCII may
be regarded as such too for our purpose; but ANSEL is a different
*character set* and requires conversion to Unicode.  [ISO 10646] makes
a further distinction between *encoding forms* like UTF-8 and UTF-16, and
*encoding schemes* like UTF-16BE and UTF-16LE.

#### Converting ANSEL to Unicode                                      {#ansel}

{.ednote} Add material from `ansel-to-unicode.md`.

### Line strings                                               {#line-strings}

Before *characters* from the *octet stream* can be parsed into *lines*,
they must be assembled into *line strings*.  This is done by appending
*characters* to the *line string* until a *line break* is encountered,
at which point the *character* or *characters* forming the *line break*
are discarded and a new *line string* is begun.  

{.note}  A *line break* is defined in §2.1 of [Basic Concepts] as a line
feed (U+000A), or carriage return (U+000D) followed by an *optional*
line feed (U+000A).  Unlike the equivalent production in [GEDCOM 5.5.1],
this does not match a line feed followed by a carriage return (U+000A
U+000D) which was used as a line ending on BBC and Acorn computers in
some specific contexts.  In ELF, this sequence is parsed as two *line
breaks* with an intervening blank *line string* which gets ignored.

*ELF parsers* *must* be able to handle arbitrarily long *line strings*,
subject to limits of available system resources.

{.note}  This is a change from [GEDCOM 5.5.1] which says that *line
strings* together with the following *line break* *must not* exceed 255
*characters*.  It is no longer common practice to parse lines using
fixed-length buffers, and ELF effectively prohibits this.

Any leading *whitespace* *shall* be removed from the *line string*, but
trailing *whitespace* *must not* also be removed except in the case that
the *line string* is entirely *whitespace*.  If this results in a *line
string* which is an empty *string*, the empty *line string* is
discarded.

{.note ...} These operations resolve ambiguities in [GEDCOM 5.5.1], and
might therefore be a change from some current implementations'
interpretation of the GEDCOM standard.  On the one hand, §1 of [GEDCOM
5.5.1] say that leading *whitespace*, including extra line terminators,
should be allowed and ignored when reading;  on the other hand, the
relevant grammar production does not permit any such leading
*whitespace*.  For maximal compatibility with existing data, a
*conformant* ELF application *must* accept and ignore leading
*whitespace* and blank lines, but *must not* generate them.

For trailing *whitespace*, [GEDCOM 5.5.1] is even less clear.  Twice,
once in §2 and once in Appendix&nbsp;A, it states that applications
sometimes remove trailing *whitespace*, but without saying whether this
behaviour is legal; certainly it implies it is not required.  There
is little consistency in the behaviour of current applications, so any
resolution to this will result in an incompatibility some applications.
In ELF, the trailing *whitespace* *must* be preserved.

The Unicode escape mechanism defined in {§unicode-escape} provides ELF
applications with a way of serialising a value which legitimately ends
in *whitespace* without it being removed by older, non-ELF-aware
applications.
{/}

### Serialising line strings                       {#serialising-line-strings}

*Line strings* are serialised by concatenating them together to form a
single *string*, inserting a *line break* between each *line string* and
after the last one.  All the inserted *line breaks* *must* have
identical lexical forms.

{.note}  Applications can choose whether to use Windows line endings
(U+000D U+000A), traditional Mac OS line endings (U+000D), or the line
endings used on Unix, Linux and modern Mac OS (U+000A), but *must not*
to use mix these in the same file.

Finally, the resulting *string* is encoded into an *octet stream*
using the *character encoding* that was documented in the *serialisation
metadata* *tagged structure* with *tag* "`CHAR`" (see
{§encoding}).  *ELF writers* are only *required* to support the UTF-8
*character encoding*, and this *should* be the default in applications
supporting additional *character encodings*.

{.ednote} Check the above paragraph.  We probably want a later section
to define an *output encoding*.

If the *character encoding* is one which allows a byte-order mark
(U+FEFF) to be encoded, an *ELF writer* *may* prepend one the *octet
stream*.  This is *recommended* when serialising to UTF-16, but is 
*not recommended* when serialising to UTF-8.

{.note} This follows the advice in §2.6 of [Unicode] that "Use
of a BOM is neither required nor recommended for UTF-8".


## Parsing and serialising structures                       {#parsing-structs}

### Parsing lines                                                     {#lines}

For a *line string* to be parsed into a *line*, it *must* match the
following `Line` production:

    Line        ::=  Number S (XRefLabel S)? Tag (PayloadSep Payload)?
    PayloadSep  ::=  #x20 | #x9

{.note ...}  The `Line` production does not allow leading *whitespace*
because this has already been removed in the process of creating *line
strings*.  The `S` production is defined in §2.1 of [Basic Concepts] and
matches any non-empty sequence of *whitespace* *characters*, though
because carriage returns and line feeds are always treated as *line
breaks* which delimit *line strings*, in practice the `S` production can
only match space or horizontal tab *characters*.  Allowing tabs or
multiple space *characters* is a departure from [GEDCOM 5.5.1], but one
that is commonly implemented in current applications.

Only a single *character* of *whitespace* is permitted before the
*payload* in the `PayloadSep` production.  This clarifies an ambiguity
in [GEDCOM 5.5.1] where Appendix&nbsp;A warns that some applications
look for the first non-space *character* as the start of the *payload*.
There is no explicit statement that such applications are non-compliant,
and this has left some doubt as to whether or not this behaviour
permitted.  In ELF this is explicitly not allowed for *payloads* which
are *strings*.

*Whitespace* is *required* between each of the four components of the
*line*.  This is arguably a change from [GEDCOM 5.5.1] where the `delim`
grammar production says that the delimiter is an *optional* space
character.  Almost certainly that is a typo in the grammar that has
persisted through several versions of GEDCOM, and GEDCOM does not intend
the space to be *optional*.  Documents written using very early versions
of GEDCOM – long before its current grammar productions were written –
did frequently merge the *level*, *cross-reference identifier* and *tag*
together, as in "`0@I1@INDI`", but this is not permitted in ELF.
{/}

{.ednote}  It would be simple enough to modify the grammar so that
"`0@I1@INDI`" would be supported, and this could help make ELF
Serialisation backwards compatible with GEDCOM 1.0.  However the TSC
know of no uses of this in files identifying as GEDCOM 5.x files, and is
not generally supported in applications.  Almost certainly it is an
error arising from confusion over the two different uses of
`[`&hellip;`]` in GEDCOM grammar productions.  Files created using
earlier versions of GEDCOM are only very rarely encountered and their
data model is incompatible with [ELF Data Model].  There seems to be
little benefit to supporting earlier versions of GEDCOM in the
serialisation layer but not in the data model.

{.example ...}
    0 @I1@ INDI
    1 NAME Cleopatra
    1 FAMC @F2@

This ELF fragment contains three *lines*.  The first *line* has a
*level* of `0`, a *cross-reference identifier* of `@I1@`, and a *tag* of
`INDI`; it has no *payload*.  Neither the second nor the third *line*
has a *cross-reference identifier*, and both have a *payload*: on the second
line the *payload* is the *string* "`Cleopatra`", while the *payload* of
the third *line* is a *pointer*, `@F2@`.
{/}

**Malformed lines** are *lines* or *line strings* which contain certain
particular types of syntactic error.  Input containing a *malformed
line* is a *non-conformant source*.  If an *ELF parser* encounters a
*malformed line*, it *shall* terminate processing the input file.

{.note} These parsing rules have been written to be very tolerant of
unusual input.  *Malformed lines* are considered sufficiently serious
errors that an *ELF parser* *must not* issue a warning to the user an
continue in an implementation-defined manner, despite this usually
being permitted when a *non-conformant source* is encountered.

Any *line string* which does not match the `Line` production is a
*malformed line*.

{.note} Empty *line strings* or *line strings* consisting only of
*whitespace* are not *malformed lines*, despite not matching the `Line`
production, because they have already been removed from the input
stream.

#### Levels

The `Number` production encodes the **level** of the *line*, which is a
non-negative decimal *integer* that records how many levels of
*substructures* deep the current *structure* is nested.

    Number  ::=  "0" | [1-9] [0-9]*

{.note}  ELF allows the *level* to be arbitrarily large, whereas 
[GEDCOM 5.5.1] limits *levels* to two decimal digits.  This is not
expected to cause any practical differences as neither [GEDCOM 5.5.1]
nor the [ELF Data Model] nest *structures* deeply.

The **previous level** of a *line* is defined as the *level* of the
closest preceding *line*.  The first *line* in the input stream has no
*previous level*.

{.example ...}
    0 INDI
    1 NOTE The 16th President of the United States.
    2 CONT Assassinated by John Wilkes Booth.
    0 TRLR

In this example, the *previous level* of the `TRLR` *line* is `2`, which
is the *level* of the `NOTE` *line*.
{/}

Any *line* that has a *level* more than one greater than its *previous
level* is a *malformed line*.  This does not apply to the first *line*
in the input stream which is never a *malformed line*.

{.example ...}  The following ELF fragment has a missing line.

    0 @I1@ INDI
    2 PLAC Москва
    3 ROMN Moscow
    1 NAME Иван Васильевич
    0 TRLR

The second *line* of this example is a *malformed line* because 
it has a *level* of 2 and a *previous level* of 0.  
{/}

{.note} *ELF parsers* are *required* to check that the first *line
string* is "`0 HEAD`" while determining the *specified character
encoding* per {§specified-enc}, which means the first *line* must always
have a *level* of 0.

#### Cross-reference identifiers                                   {#xref-ids}

The `XRefLabel` production encodes the **cross-reference identifier** of
the *line*, which is used when referencing one *structure* from another
using a *pointer*, and *may* be omitted when there is no need to refer to the
*structure*.  It is encoded with an "at" signs (`@`; U+0040) before and
after it, which are not themselves part of *cross-reference identifer*.

    XRefLabel  ::=  "@" XRefID "@"
    XRefID     ::=  IDChar+
    IDChar     ::=  [A-Za-z0-9] | [?$&'*+,;=._~-]
                      | [#xA0-#xD7FF] | [#xF900-#xFFEF] | [#x10000-#xEFFFF]

{.example ...}  The following is a well-formed *line* with a
*cross-reference identifier* of "`I1`":

    0 @I1@ INDI
{/}

{.note ...}  [GEDCOM 5.5.1] allows *cross-reference identifiers* to
contain any *character* other than a space (U+0020), the "at" sign
(U+0040), the C0, C1 and DEL control *characters* (U+0001 to U+001F,
U+0080 to U+009F, and U+007F), so long as it starts with an alphanumeric
ASCII *character*.  ELF removes the requirement that the first
*character* of a *cross-reference identifier* be an alphanumeric ASCII
*character*, and explicitly allows non-ASCII *characters* in
*cross-reference identifiers*, though it prohibits the following
*characters* which were allowed in GEDCOM:

*Characters*                    Reason for exclusion
---------------------------     ----------------------------------------------
`! :`                           Reserved in ELF and GEDCOM *pointers*
`# % [ ] < > " { } | \ ^ \` `   Require escaping in IRI fragment identifiers
`( ) /`                         Reserved for future FHISO use
*Private use characters*        Ambiguous without agreed meaning
`[#xFFF0-#xFFFE]`               Require escaping in IRI fragment identifiers
---------------------------     ----------------------------------------------

FHISO anticipates using *cross-reference identifiers* in IRI fragment
identifiers in a future ELF standard, and have therefore prohibited all
*characters* which [RFC 3987] says have to be escaped in this context.
{/}

{.ednote}  Is the set of permitted *characters* right?  Even though
GEDCOM seems to allow everything, in practice only alphanumeric ASCII
*characters* seem to be used in actual GEDCOM data.  It would probably
therefore be safe to remove further punctuation *characters*, if
desired.

For maximum compatibility, *ELF writers* *should* prefer
*cross-reference identifiers* which only use ASCII *characters*, and
*should* make the first *character* of a *cross-reference identifier* a
letter (U+0041 to U+005A or U+0061 to U+007A), decimal digit (U+0030 to
U+0039) or underscore (U+005F).

{.note} [GEDCOM 5.5.1] requires the first *character* of a
*cross-reference identifer* to match [A-Za-z0-9_].  This is downgraded
to a recommendation in ELF.

{.note} The status of *code points* above U+00FE in *cross-reference
identifiers* is not entirely clear in [GEDCOM 5.5.1].  None of its
grammatical production mention them, though it seems likely its
`otherchar` production is intended to include all non-ASCII
*characters* and not just U+0080 to U+00FE.

#### Tags                                                              {#tags}

The `Tag` production encodes the **tag** of the *line* which is a 
*required* *string* that denotes the meaning of the data encoded on the
*line*.

    Tag  ::=  [0-9a-zA-Z_]+

The ELF suite of standards defines a selection of *tags* for
representing genealogical data.   

{.note}  These are mostly defined in the [ELF Data Model] standard.

Third parties *may* define additional *tags* for use in ELF documents in
two ways.  The first way, which is *deprecated*, is to use a *legacy
extension tag*.  These are *tags* beginning with an underscore (`_`,
U+005F).  No *legacy extension tags* are defined in the ELF standards,
and third parties can use them arbitrarily.

{.example ...}  The `_UID` *tag* is a *legacy extension tag* which has been
implemented in a number of current applications and typically contains
a 128-bit UUID as defined in [RFC 4122].

    1 _UID 40ea7ad8-a5ba-4a7a-bb89-615cc2bf6639
{/}

{.note}  *Legacy extension tags* are how [GEDCOM 5.5.1] allows for
extensibilty, and ELF continues to support this.  However, there is no
mechanism to prevent two different third parties from using the same
*legacy extension tag* in incompatible ways.  This is why this
mechansism is *deprecated* in ELF.

{.example}  The `_UID` *legacy extension tag* described in the previous
example has also been used in some applications to contain a 144-bit
identifier, which was a UUID followed by a 16-bit checksum.
Applications expecting to find a standard 128-bit UUID will likely fail
to parse this 144-bit form.

The second and preferred means of adding third-party *tags* is to define
them in an ELF schema and reference that schema using a *schema
reference*.

{.ednote}  Revise this paragraph once the relevant section has been
written.

The `HEAD`, `TRLR`, `CONC`, `CONT`, `PLANG` and `DTYPE` *tags* are
reserved in all contexts for recording *header records*, *trailer
records*, *continuation lines*, *payload languages* and *payload
datatypes* and *must not* be used in any other way.

{.note}  This standard does not reserve any other *tags* for use as
serialisation layer constructs in future versions of ELF.  If a future
standard adds additional *tags* to this list, they will only be
interpreted conditionally based on the *ELF serialisation version*.

A *tag* *should* be no more than 15 characters in length.

{.note} [GEDCOM 5.5.1] required *tags* to be unique within the first 15
*characters* and no more than 31 *characters* in length.  As the memory
constraints that motivated those requirements are no longer common, ELF
makes this limit *recommended* only.

{.example}  The *legacy extension tag*, `_FATHER_OF_BRIDE` is a valid
*tag*, but *should not* be used because it is 16 *characters* long.

#### Payloads

The **payload** of a *line* is an *optional* value associated with the
*line*, which is encoded by the `Payload` production.  If present, it
*shall* be either a *string* or a *pointer*, which are encoded by the
`PayloadString` and `Pointer` productions, respectively.  The `String`
production is given in §2 of [Basic Concepts] as a sequence of zero or
more *characters*.  

    Payload        ::=  S? Pointer S? | PayloadString
    PayloadString  ::=  String - ( S? Pointer S? )

{.note}  Even though the *payload* of a *line* is encoding the *payload*
of a *tagged structure*, which is either a *language-tagged string* or a
*pointer*, the *payload* of a *line* is a plain *string* or a *pointer*.
This is because the *language tag* is encoded on separate *lines*.

Applications *must* treat a *line* with an omitted *payload* identically
to a *line* with a *payload* consisting of an empty *string*.

{.note} It is an artefact of the grammar that this distinction exists at
all.  If the *line string* ends with a *tag* followed by *whitespace*,
then the `Line` production matches via the `S String` alternative, with
an empty *string*; however if the *line string* ends with a *tag* with
no subsequent *whitespace*, then the `Line` production matches without
the final *optional* `Payload` component.  

{.note} The `PayloadString` production explicitly excludes any *string*
which matches the `Pointer` production (with or without leading or
trailing *whitespace*), which also match the `String` production.   This
means *ELF parsers* *must* treat the *payload* as a *pointer* if it
matches the `Pointer` production, and only as a *string* if it does not.

{.ednote ...}  An earlier draft of this standard used the following
`PayloadString` production.

    PayloadString ::= PayloadItem*
    PayloadItem   ::= PayloadChar | EscapedAt | EscapeSeq
    PayloadChar   ::= [^#x40#xA#xD]
    EscapedAt     ::= "@@"
    EscapeSeq     ::= "@#" [A-Z] PayloadChar* "@"

This ensures that only strings with correctly escaped "at" signs
(U+0040) are allowed in a *payload*.  This draft does not do this
because it would require all "at" signs to be correctly escaped.   In
practice, unescaped "at" signs are fairly commonly found in GEDCOM
files, particularly in the *payload* of `EMAIL` *lines*.  It is fairly
easy to specify ELF so that these can be accommodated and this draft
does so.  Many current products appear to allow unescaped "at" signs in
the manner proposed here.
{/}

A **pointer** is a *payload* which represents a link to another
*structure*.  It is encoded using the following `Pointer` production.

    Pointer  ::=  "@" [^#x23#x40#xA#xD] [^#x40#xA#xD]* "@"

{.note}  This production allows any *character* in a *pointer*, except a
line feed (U+000A) and carriage return (U+000D), which cannot appear in
a *line string*; the "at" sign (`@`, U+0040), which is used to mark the end
of the pointer; and the number sign (`#`, U+0023), which is only
prohibited as the first *character* in order to distinguish *pointers*
from *escape sequences*.

{.note} Although an *ELF parser* *must* interpret any *string* matching
the `Pointer` production as a *pointer*, in practice only those matching
the `XRefLabel` production in {§xref-ids} are valid as pointers in ELF
1.0.  Any other *pointers* will be discarded as invalid in **§XXX**, but
are permitted in the grammar for future use.

{.ednote}  Fix the **§XXX** reference above, once pointer checking has been
specified.

{.note ...} [GEDCOM 5.5.1] describes a *pointer* syntax similar to the
following production:

    GEDCOMPointer  ::=  "@" (IDChar+ ":")? XRefID ("!" IDChar+)? "@"

The *optional* identifier before the colon (`:`, U+003A) is used to
reference a remote file, and the *optional* identifier following the
exclamation mark (`!`, U+0021) is used to reference a *structure* within
a *record*.  However, GEDCOM provides no means of using these, so they
are effectively reserved for a future version of GEDCOM.  They remain
reserved for these purposes in ELF, and a future version of ELF is
likely to provide a means of referencing *structures* outside the
current document.
{/}


### Parsing lines into structures                            {#tagged-structs}

Once *line strings* have been parsed into *lines*, the sequence of
*lines* is converted into a sequence of *records*. 

This process starts by parsing the first *line* of the input as the
first *line* of a *tagged structure* using the procedure given
{§first-pass}.  If that *record* has *substructures* then
additional *lines* will be read while parsing it.  This *structure* is
the first *record* in the *dataset*, and *shall* be the *header
record*.  

Once the *header record* has been read, it *shall* be parsed according
to {§parsing-metadata} to extract the *serialisation metadata*, which
affects the subsequent parsing of the file.

If further *lines* remain after the *header record* has been fully
parsed, then the first of the remaining lines is parsed as first *line*
of the next *record* in the *dataset*, again using the procedure given
in {§first-pass}.  This process is repeated until no further
*lines* remain, at which point the *dataset* has the been fully read.

{.note} The process described in this section, together with the
guarantee provided by {§specified-enc} that the first *line* is always
"`0 HEAD`", ensures that the first *line* of every *record* necessarily
has a *level* of 0.

If the last *record* has a *tag* of `TRLR`, and no *cross-reference
identifier*, *payload* or *substructures*, it is discarded.  Such a
*record* is called a **trailer record**.  If the last *record* is not a
*trailer record*, it is a *malformed structure* as defined in
{§error-structures}.  

{.note} [GEDCOM 5.5.1] includes a mechanism for splitting a logical
document into multiple physical documents, sometimes called volumes.
Only the first volume begins with a *header record* and only the last
volume ends with a *trailer record*.  This dates to an era when
documents were commonly stored and distributed on floppy disks, and
a large GEDCOM document might exceed the storage capacity of a single
disk.  This functionality is no longer necessary and is not widely
implemented in present applications.  It is not supported in ELF.

Once each *record* has been assembled, an *ELF parser* *shall* make a
second pass over the *record* processing it as described in
{§second-pass}.  This does not apply to the discarded *trailer record*.

{.ednote} At the moment an *ELF parser* *may* do assemble all
*structures* per {§first-pass}, then make a second pass over each
*record* per {§second-pass}, or *may* do the second pass over each
*record* immediately after it has been assembled.  This might change.

#### First pass: assembling                                      {#first-pass}

The conversion of *lines* into *structures* is defined recursively.  To
read a *structure*, the parser starts by reading its first *line*, and
creates a *tagged structure* whose components are as follows:

* the *cross-reference identifier* of the first *line*;
* the *tag* of the first *line*;
* the *payload* of the first *line*, provisionally tagged with the "`und`"
  *language tag* if the *payload* of the first *line* is a *string* rather
  than a *pointer*; and 
* an empty sequence of *substructures*.

{.note}  A default *language tag* is needed because the *payload* of a
*line* is either a *string* or a *pointer*, while the *payload* of a
*tagged structure* is either a *language-tagged string* or a *pointer*.

{.ednote} Expand the previous note to say which section causes the
actual *language tag* to be set.

The *level* of the first *line* of the *structure* is referred to in
this section as the **current level**.  

{.note}  The *current level* can also be thought of as the recursion
depth.  Once the application has finished reading the *structure*, its
*current level* is no longer needed.

The parser then repeatedly inspects the next *line* to determine whether
it represents the start of a *substructure* of the *structure* being
read.  If the next *line* has a *level* less than or equal to the
*current level*, there are no further *substructures* and the
application has finished reading the *structure*.  

{.example ...}
    1 DEAT Y
    0 TRLR

In the above ELF fragment, the parser reads the first *line* and creates a
*structure* with a `DEAT` *tag* and a *payload* of "`Y`".  It then
inspects the following *line*, but because the following *line* has a
*level* of 0 which is less than the *level* of the first *line* of the
`DEAT` *structure*, this indicates that the `DATE` *structure* has no
*substructures*.
{/}

Otherwise, the application *shall* recursively parse the next *line* as
the first *line* of a new *structure* and append it to the list of
*substructures* being read.  Parsing continues by inspecting the
following *line* to see if it is the start of another *substructure*, as
described above.

{.example ...}
    0 @I1@ INDI
    1 NAME Elizabeth
    1 BIRT
    2 DATE 21 APR 1926
    0 TRLR

In this fragment, an application reads the first *line* and creates an
`INDI` *structure*.  The next *line* has a *level* one greater than the
*level* of the `INDI` *line*, so is parsed as the start of a
*substructure*.  The parser creates a `NAME` *structure*, and as the
*level* of the following *line* is no greater than the *level* of the
`NAME` *line*, the `NAME` *structure* has no *substructures*.  The
`NAME` *structure* is appended as a *substructure* of the `INDI`
*structure*.

The parser then repeats the process, looking for further *substructures*
of the `INDI` *structure*.  The `BIRT` *line* is also one greater than
the *level* of the `INDI` *line*, so is also parsed as the start of a
*substructure*, but this time it has a *substructure* of its own, namely
the `DATE` *structure*.  The `TRLR` *line* has a *level* of 0 which
tells the parser there are no further *substructures* of the `INDI`
*structure*.  

The result is an `INDI` *structure* with two *substructures* with *tags*
`NAME` and `BIRT`, respectively, the latter of which has a
*substructure* of its own with tag `DATE`.  
{/}

#### Second pass: processing                                    {#second-pass}

Once each of *record* has been assembled, an *ELF parser* *shall* make a
second pass over the *record*, processing it and its *substructures*
recursively.  Each step of the recursion proceeds as follows.

First, if the *structure* has a *tag* of `CONC`, `CONT` or `TRLR`, or if
the *tag* is `HEAD` and the *structure* is not the first *record* of the
input, it is a *malformed structure*.

{.ednote}  `PLANG` and `DTYPE` may need adding to this list.

{.note}  The `CONC` or `CONT` *tags* *must* only be used in
*continuation lines*, as described in {§line-cont}.  They are removed
when their parent *structure* is being processed in this second pass,
and therefore no longer exist when processing recurses into the
*substructures*.  The `TRLR` *tag* *must* only be used for the *trailer
record* which is removed before this second pass.  The `HEAD` *tag*
*must* only be used for the *header record*.  If any of these *tags*
remain at this stage, it is because they have been misused.

Next, if the *ELF parser* is *schema-aware*, the *tagged structure*
*shall* be converted into a *typed structure* as described in [ELF
Schemas].  

{.note ...}  A *typed structure* is defined in [ELF Schemas] as
consisting of:

*  an *optional* *cross-reference identifier*;
*  a *structure type*, which is a *term* encoding the meaning of the 
   *structure*;
*  an *optional* *payload*, which is either a *literal* or a *pointer*;
*  a sequence of zero or more child *substructures*.

This differs from a *tagged structure* in two ways: first, the *tag* is
replaced with a *structure type*, which is an IRI; and secondly, *string
payloads* are *literals* rather than *language-typed strings*.  A
*literal* is a *tagged string* which has both a *language tag* and a
*datatype* as *tags*.

In later stages of parsing, the *ELF parser* either acts on a *tagged
structure* or a *typed structure*, depending on whether this conversion
has taken place.  The word *structure* is used to refer to either.
{/}

Next, if the *payload* of *structure* is a *string payload*, it is
unescaped as described in {§payload-unesc}.

{.note}  This step removes any *escaped at signs*, *Unicode escapes* or
*continuation lines* from the *structure*.

Finally, each *substructure* of the *structure* is processed
recursively, in order, as described in this section.

#### Errors in structures                                  {#error-structures}

This standard defines two classes of error that can arise when
processing a *structure*.

A **malformed structure** is a *structure* with a sufficiently serious
error that an *ELF parser* *must* detect the error and *must* terminate
processing the input file upon encountering one.

A **non-conformant structure** is a *structure* with a less serious
error.  Input containing either a *malformed structure* or a
*non-conformant structure* is a *non-conformant source*.

{.note}  When a *non-conformant structure* is encountered, the usual
rules for *non-conformant sources* apply.  An *ELF parser* *must*
either terminate parsing or warn the user about the error.  If it
continues processing the *structure*, it does so in an
implementation-defined manner.

{.note}  The [ELF Schemas] standard defines a third class of erroneous
*structure* called *invalid structures*.  *ELF parsers* are not required
to detect these and need not issue an warning if they do.

### Serialising structures

Each *xref structure* is encoded as a sequence of one or more *lines*.

These are of three kinds, in order:

1. The **first line** of the *xref structure*
2. Zero or more **additional lines** of the *xref structure*
3. The *lines* that encode each of the *xref structure*'s *substructures* (if any)

{.note} The constraint that *additional lines* come before the *lines* of *substructures* is never mentioned by [GEDCOM 5.5.1]. ELF includes it because it appears to have been universally applied by GEDCOM implementations, and some may depend upon it.

The **level** of each line is a non-negative integer.
The *level* of a *first line* is 0 if the *xref structure* is a *record*
or the *serialisation metadata* *tagged structures* with *tag* "`HEAD`" and "`TRLR`";
otherwise it is one greater than the *level* of the *first line* of its *superstructure*.
The *level* of an *additional line* is one greater than the *level* of its *xref structure*'s *first line*.

Each *first line* has the same *xref_id* (if any) and *tag* as its corresponding *xref line*.
Each *additional line* has no *xref_id* and either "`CONT`" or "`CONC`" as its *tag*.

{.note} Because an *xref structure* MUST NOT have either "`CONC`" or "`CONT`" as its *tag*, it is unambiguous which *lines* are *additional lines* and which *first line* they correspond to.

The *payload* of the *xref structure*
is the concatenation of the *payloads* of the *first line* and all *additional lines*,
with a *line break* inserted before the *payload* of each *additional line* with *tag* "`CONT`".
Because the *payload* of a *line* MUST NOT contain a *line-break*, there MUST be exactly one "`CONT`"-*tagged* *additional line* per *line-break* in the *xref structure*'s *payload*.
The number of "`CONC`"-*tagged* *additional lines* may be picked arbitrarily, subject to the following:

- Each *line* SHOULD be no more than 255 octets after a *line break* has
  been added and the result encoded in the target *character encoding*.
  This *recommended* limit is increased to 510 octets if the target
  *character encoding* is UTF-16.

{.note} GEDCOM *required* that *lines* not exceed 255 *characters*;
this does not seem to be a real restriction in most current applications,
and hence has been reduced to *recommended* status.
We recommend bytes instead of *characters* because the implied 
purpose of this limit (enabling code to use fixed-width buffers)
would limit by bytes, not characters.


- The *payload* of a *line* preceding a "`CONC`"-*tagged* *line* SHOULD NOT have an empty *payload*.
- The *payload* of a *line* preceding a "`CONC`"-*tagged* *line* MUST
  NOT end with a *whitespace*.
- A "`CONC`"-*tagged* *line*' *payload* SHOULD NOT begin with
  *whitespace*.

{.note ...} [GEDCOM 5.5.1] is inconsistent in its discussion of leading and trailing *whitespace*.

- The first of rule in the section "Grammar Rules" in Chapter 1 REQUIRES that spaces be after, not before, a `CONC` split; they (nonsensically) require the same for `CONT`s as well.
- The grammar for `optional_line_value` in Chapter 1 allows both leading and trailing space, with no permission to remove it.
- The definition of `CONC {CONCATENATION}` in Appendix A says an implementation MAY "look for the first non-space starting after the tag to determine the beginning of the value" and hence leading spaces MUST NOT appear.
- The definition of `CONT {CONTINUED}` in Appendix A says an implementation MUST keep leading spaces in a `CONT` as an exception to the usual rules.
- The definition of `NOTE_STRUCTURE` in Chapter 2 says that "most operating systems will strip off the trailing space and the space is lost in the reconstitution of the note."

The RECOMMENDATIONS above are compatible with the most restrictive of these,
while the REQUIREMENTS with the most limiting of them.
{/}

{.example ...}
Suppose an *xref structure*
*tag* is "`NOTE`";
it's *payload* is "`This is a test\nwith one line break`";
and its *superstructure*'s *superstructure* is a *record*.
This *xref structure* requires at least two *lines*
(because it contains one *line break*) and may use more.
It could be serialised in many ways, such as

````gedcom
2 NOTE This is a test
3 CONT with one line break
````

or

````gedcom
2 NOTE This i
3 CONC s a test
3 CONT with on
3 CONC e line break
````
{/}

- Each *line*'s *payload* MUST contain an even number of U+0040 (`@`).
    However, during parsing, this constraint SHALL NOT be enforced in any way.

{.note} [GEDCOM 5.5.1] gives no guidance how to handle unmatched "`@`", but they are relatively common in gedcom files. The above policy is intended to resolve common invalid files in an intuitive way.

{.example ...} Given the following non-*conformant* data

    1 EMAIL name@example.com
    2 DATE @#DGREG
    3 CONC ORIAN@ 2 JAN 2019

a *conformant* application will concatenate these *lines* normally during parsing

    1 EMAIL name@example.com
    2 DATE @#DGREGORIAN@ 2 JAN 2019

creating a valid date escape in the `DATE`-*tagged* *extended line*.
The unmatched `@` in the `EMAIL`-*tagged* *line* is left unchanged during parsing.

Upon re-serialisation, the unmatched @ in the "`EMAIL`" will be doubled when converting to an *xref structure*,
but the date escape will not be modified

    1 EMAIL name@@example.com
    2 DATE @#DGREGORIAN@ 2 JAN 2019

If the serialisation decides to split either *extended line* with `CONC`s, it MUST NOT do so
in a way that splits up the pairs of "`@`"s.
{/}

### Serialising lines                                     {#serialising-lines}

{.ednote} The payload needs escaping, either here or in the next
section.

Each *line* *shall* be converted to a *line string* by concatenating
together the *level*, *cross-reference identifier*, *tag* and *payload* as
described by the `Line` *production* given in {§lines}.  The application
*must* serialise all *line strings* with a single space *character*
(U+0020) for each `S` or `PayloadSep` production in the `Line`
production, and *must not* put additional *whitespace* before or after
*payloads* which are *pointers*.

{.example ...}  Although *ELF parsers* are *required* to be able to read
the following *line string*, *ELF writers* *must not* produce this
*line string*.

    1 FAMC  @F9@

There are two space *characters* after the `FAMC` *tag* in this example.
When parsing, the first space is matched by the `PayloadSep` production
while the second is matched by the *optional* `S` production that comes
before the *pointer* in the `Payload` production.  *ELF writers* *must
not* insert additional *whitespace* before the pointer, and therefore 
*must not* produce this *line string*.
{/}

## Header metadata                                                   {#header}

The **header record** is the first *record* in an ELF document.  It
*shall* have a `HEAD` *tag*, no *payload* and no *cross-reference
identifier*.  The *substructures* of the *header record* are called
**metadata structures**, and contain information about the dataset as a
whole.

Certain *metadata structures*, which are referred to as **serialisation
metadata structures**, are processed by the *ELF parser* during parsing
and then removed from the dataset.  Each *serialisation metadata
structure* encodes one piece of **serialisation metadata**, as
determined by the *tag* of the *serialisation metadata structure*.  The
*serialisation metadata* affects how the *ELF parser* processes the
file.

This standard defines five types of *serialisation metadata*, as given
in the following table.

*Tag*    *Serialisation metadata*
-------- --------------------------------------
`CHAR`   *specified character encoding*, as defined in {§specified-enc}
`ELF`    *ELF serialisation version*, as defined in {§serialisation-version}
`GED`    *legacy GEDCOM version*, as defined in {§gedcom-version}
`PLANG`  *default payload language*
`SCHMA`  *schema reference*
-------- --------------------------------------

{.note}  These *tags* are not reserved in other context, except as
specified in **§XXX** for the `PLANG` *tag*.  This standard does not
reserve any *tags* for future use as *serialisation metadata
structures*.  If a future standard adds new ones, they will only be
interpreted conditionally based on the *ELF serialisation version*.

{.ednote} Fix this reference.

{.note}  The escaping facilities in {§escaping}, including *Unicode
escapes* and *continuation lines*, cannot be used in *serialisation
metadata structures* because these facilities are only interpreted after
the *serialisation metadata structures* have been processed.  Other
*metadata structures* *may* use these facilities.

{.example ...}  The following fragment does not contain a *Unicode
escape* in the `ELF` *serialisation metadata structure*, and so does not
represent the version 1.0.  It is simply interpreted as the *string*
"`1@#U2E@0`".  This is not a valid *version number*, as defined in
{§version-numbers}, and therefore the `ELF` *structure* is a
*non-conformant structure*.  An *ELF parser* *must* either terminate
processing on encountering it, or issue a warning.

    0 HEAD
    1 ELF 1@#U2E@0
{/}

{.example ...}  The following fragment contains a `NOTE` *metadata
structure* whose payload, after unescaping, is the string "`Ceci est une
longue note à propos de ce document`".

    0 HEAD
    1 NOTE Ceci est une longue note @#UC0@ pro
    2 CONC pos de ce document
    2 PLANG fr
    0 TRLR

This is allowed because the `NOTE` *tag* does not denote a
*serialisation metadata structure*.  The `PLANG` *substructure* does not
denote a *serialisation metadata structure* because it is not a direct
*substructure* of the *header record*.
{/}

### Version numbers                                         {#version-numbers}

The *payload* of the `ELF` *serialisation metadata structure*, and the
*payload* of the `VERS` *substructure* of the `GEDC` *serialisation
metadata structure* both contain a **version number**, which is a
*string* used to record the version of a standard that matches the
following `Version` production:

    Version  ::=  Integer "." Integer ( "." Integer )?
    Integer  ::=  [0-9]+

The three components represented by the `Integer` production are decimal
integers, and *may* include leading zeros which are ignored.  These
components are called the **major version**, **minor version** and
**revision number**, respectively.  If the *revision number* is omitted,
a value of 0 is assumed.

{.example ...}  The following three *numbers version* are exactly
equivalent:

    1 ELF 1.0
    1 ELF 1.0.0
    1 ELF 1.000

{/}

#### ELF serialisation version                        {#serialisation-version}

The **ELF serialisation version** is a *version number* located in the
*payload* of the `ELF` *serialisation metadata structure*, and 
indicates the version of the ELF Serialisation standard with which the
document complies.  

The *version number* of this version of the standard is 1.0.0.  An *ELF
writer* producing output according to this standard *must* include this
*ELF serialisation version* in the output if the generated file contains
any *Unicode escapes*, *schema references*, *payload languages* or
*payload datatypes*.

{.note}  This is not an absolute requirement so that *ELF writers* can
produce output that can be read by strict GEDCOM parsers which reject
input containing any unknown *tags* other than *legacy extension tags*,
or *escape sequences*.

If an *ELF parser* is reading a document with an *ELF serialisation
version* which differs from the *version number* of this standard only
by the *revision number*, the *ELF parser* *must* parse the input
according to this standard.

If an *ELF parser* encounters an *ELF serialisation version* which has a
different *minor version* to this standard, but the same *major
version*, it *should* parse the input according to this standard, but
*should* issue a warning to the user that the document is in an unknown
version of ELF.

If an *ELF parser* encounters an *ELF serialisation version* with a
different *major version*, the document is a *non-conformant source*.

{.note}  These rules are designed to handle forwards compatibility.  A
future version of this standard is likely to need to change these to
better handle backwards compatibility with earlier versions of ELF.

#### Legacy GEDCOM version                                   {#gedcom-version}

The **legacy GEDCOM version** is a *version number* located in the
*payload* of the `VERS` *substructure* of the `GEDC` *serialisation
metadata structure*, and indicates the version of GEDCOM which the
document is compatible with.

This standard, when used together with the [ELF Data Model], is
compatible with both GEDCOM 5.5 and GEDCOM 5.5.1.  An *ELF writer*
producing output according to this standard *must* include a *legacy
GEDCOM version* of either `5.5` or `5.5.1` in the output if it omitted
the *ELF serialisation version* or if it included no *schema references*
in the output, and *should* do so otherwise if the document conforms to
the [ELF Data Model].

{.note}  This recommendation means that a *legacy GEDCOM version* might
be generated claiming compatibility with a version of GEDCOM that it is
not strictly compatible with.  In practice, it is common to encounter
GEDCOM files that are not strictly compatible with the claimed version
of GEDCOM, and GEDCOM parsers are typically tolerant in what they
accept.  Nevertheless, an *ELF writer* can always opt not to include a
*legacy GEDCOM version*, so long as an *ELF serialisation version* and
appropriate *schema reference* are included.

{.ednote}  When parsing ...

### Parsing serialisation metadata                         {#parsing-metadata}

Once a *header record* has been assembled as described in {§first-pass},
the *ELF parser* *shall* iterate over its *substructures* looking for
*structures* with a *tag* of `CHAR`, `ELF`, `GED`, `PLANG` or `SCHMA`.
These *substructures* are identified as *serialisation metadata
structures* and processed as specified in this section.

Any *serialisation metadata structure*, or any *structure* nested within
a *serialisation metadata structure* regardless of the depth of the
nesting, is a *non-conformant structure* if it has a *cross-reference
identifier*, or if it has a *tag* of `HEAD`, `TRLR`, `CONC` or `CONT`,
or if it has a *payload* which is a *pointer*.

{.example ...} The `SCHMA` *structure* in the following document is a
*non-conformant structure*:

    0 HEAD
    1 SCHMA https://example.com/this/is/a/very/long/IRI
    2 CONC /which/has/been/continued/on/to/two/lines
    0 TRLR

{/}

{.note}  For forward compatibility, this standard does not put limits on
what *substructures* a *serialisation metadata structure* can have.
Unknown *substructures* are ignored.

If a *header record* contains two or more *serialisation metadata
structures* with the same *tag*, and that *tag* is not `SCHMA`, the
second and subsequent *serialisation metadata structures* are
*non-conformant structures*.

{.example ...}  The second `PLANG` *structure* in this ELF fragment is a
*non-conformant structure* as a document *must not* have multiple 
*default payload languages*.  An *ELF parser* *must* either terminate
processing the file or issue a warning.
  
    0 HEAD
    1 PLANG nds
    1 PLANG de

{/}

If the *serialisation metadata structure* has a *tag* of `CHAR`, it is
deleted from the *header record* with no further processing.

{.note}  This *serialisation metadata structure* contains the *specified
character encoding* which was already read in {§specified-enc}.

If the *serialisation metadata structure* has a *tag* of `ELF`, and its
*payload* is a valid *version number*, that *version number* is
interpreted as the *ELF serialisation version* as described in
{§serialisation-version}, and the *structure* is deleted from the
*header record*.  If its *payload* is not a valid *version number*, it
is a *non-conformant structure*.



## Escaping                                                        {#escaping}

Once *structures* have been assembled from the *lines* forming them, and
converted to a *typed structures* if the application is *schema-aware*,
any *string payloads* need to be unescaped.

ELF uses the "at" sign (`@`; U+0040) in the representation of
*pointers*, as well as in *escape sequences* which are used to encode
a special processing instructions in a *string payload*.  Other uses of
the "at" sign in *payloads* which are *strings* *should* be escaped, and
*must* be when not escaping it would result in an ambiguity.

{.note}  [GEDCOM 5.5.1] says they *must* be escaped, but many current
applications fail to do this.  This is particularly relevant to the
`EMAIL` *structure* which almost invariably has a payload containing
one "at" sign, and is often not properly escaped in real-world data.
*Payloads* with a single "at" sign are never legal in GEDCOM.  ELF
requires such *payloads* to be interpreted as if the "at" sign had been
escaped.

ELF provides two escape mechanisms which can escape an "at" sign in a
*payload*.  The *recommended* mechanism is to use an *escaped at sign*,
defined in {§escaped-at}.  The alternative is to use a *Unicode
escape*, which is a more general escape mechanism defined in
{§unicode-escape} that allows arbitrary Unicode *characters* to be
encoded.  *Unicode escapes* are an example of an *escape sequence*,
which is a general facility for embedding special processing
instructions in a *string payload*.  *Escape sequences* are defined in
{§escape-seq}.

### Escaped at signs                                             {#escaped-at}

An **escaped at sign** is a *string* matching the `EscapedAt` production
below, and is used to represent a single "at" sign in a *string
payload*.

    EscapedAt  ::=  "@@"

{.example ...}  An *escaped at sign* simply doubles up the "at" sign.  Thus,
the email address `name@example.com` *should* be encoded as follows:

    1 EMAIL name@@example.com
{/}

### Escape sequences                                             {#escape-seq}

An **escape sequence** is a *string* that can be used in a *string
payload* to denote some form of special processing instruction.  

{.note}  It is the intention that *escape sequences* are only used to
denote processing instructions that are carried out at the serialisation
layer, as defined in this standard or a subsequent version of it.  The
use of *escape sequences* to denote calendars in [ELF Dates] is not an
example of the intended use of *escape sequences* in ELF, though it is
supported for compatibility with [GEDCOM 5.5.1].

An *escape sequence* *shall* match the following `EscapeSeq` production.

    EscapeSeq    ::=  "@#" EscapeType EscapeValue "@"
    EscapeType   ::=  [A-Z]
    EscapeValue  ::=  [^#x40#xA#xD]*

{.example ...}  The following *line* contains an *escape sequence*:

    2 DATE @#DFRENCH R@ 6 COMP 11

*Escape sequences* containing internal spaces are explicitly allowed by
this standard and this example uses the `D` *escape type* to write a
date using the French Republican calendar defined in §4.3 of [ELF
Dates].
{/}

{.note ...}  This production differs in two ways from the equivalent
production in [GEDCOM 5.5.1].  First, the *character* immediately
following the initial "`@#`" *must* be an upper-case ASCII letter in
ELF.  This was formerly a requirement in GEDCOM too, but was dropped
after GEDCOM 5.3; nevertheless, all uses of *escape sequences* in past
and present GEDCOM standards have conformed to this syntax requirement,
and ELF reintroduces it.

Secondly, the production does not require a *character* after the final
"at" sign, meaning that a space *character* immediately after an *escape
sequence* is treated as part of a *string payload* and not as part of
the *escape sequence*.  This change has been made so that *Unicode
escapes* can be used internally in a word, without requiring a space
afterwards.  For example, the Portuguese name João might be encoded as:

    1 NAME Jo@#UE3@o
{/}

{.ednote ...}  Is the second change likely to cause problems?  Are there
current applications which will issue an error when they encounter a
*escape sequence* which is not followed by a space, but will accept
unknown *escape sequences*?
{/}

The **escape type** of an *escape sequence* is the single *character*
matched by `EscapeType` production.  It defines how the *escape
sequence* is to be interpreted.  This standard defines one *escape
type*: the *character* `U` is used to represent *Unicode escapes*, as
defined in {§unicode-escape}.

{.note}  [ELF Dates] defines the `D` *escape type* for specifying
calendar names, and this is the sole use of *escape sequences* in
[GEDCOM 5.5.1].  Previous versions of GEDCOM have used the `A` *escape
type* for referencing multimedia objects in auxiliary files, `C` for
switching *character encoding*, `F` for including data from another
file, and `L` for recording the number of *octets* of binary data
immediately following.  ELF does not support these *character escapes*,
but FHISO is unlikely to reuse these *escape types* in future version of
ELF unless for a compatible feature.

This standard reserves all possible *escape types* for future FHISO use.
Third parties *must not* use their own *escape sequences*, except as
permitted by a FHISO standard.  

{.note}  This restriction is necessary because only 26 *escape types* are
possible, and between ELF and past versions of GEDCOM, six of these have
already been used.  A future ELF standard may define an extensibility
mechanism for *escape sequences* which will allow third parties to
define their own *escape sequences* in a way that does not need
exclusive use a *escape type*.

{.ednote ...}  This extensibility mechanism is likely to be in [ELF
Schemas], and could be as simple as a *escape type* to IRI mapping to
define how the *escape type* is used in that particular document.  For
example,

    0 SCHMA
    1 ESC B https://example.com/binary-escape

Possibly this will be included in ELF 1.0, and if so, the paragraph above
reserving all *escape sequences* will need changing.  But the TSC do not
consider this feature a priority for ELF 1.0.
{/}

The **escape value** of an *escape sequence* is the *string* matched by
the `EscapeValue` production.  The meaning of the *escape value* and any
restrictions on its content or format depend on the particular *escape
type*.  The only general restriction placed on all *escape values* is
that they *must not* contain the "at" sign (U+0040), line feed (U+000A),
or carriage return (U+000D).

{.note}  Although almost any *character* is permitted in an *escape
value*, in practice, the range of *characters* that can actually occur
in an *escape value* in ELF 1.0 is quite limited.  ELF 1.0 only uses two
*escape types* – `D` for calendar escapes and `U` for *Unicode
escapes* – and does not allow third parties to define their own.  The
*Unicode escape* syntax defined in {§unicode-escape} only allows
*whitespace* and hexadecimal digits to appear in the *escape value*,
while the calendar escape syntax defined in §3.1 of [ELF Dates] only
allows *whitespace* and ASCII letters.  This means no punctuation
*characters* can actually occur in an *escape value* in ELF 1.0, even
though they are permitted in the generic syntax and *must* be accepted
in unknown *escapes sequences*.  A future version of ELF might reserve
one or more currently unused *character* for a specific purpose within
an *escape sequence*.

{.ednote ...}  In particular, it is not possible to put arbitrary IRIs
in an *escape value*, something which may need considering more
carefully in the future, especially if there is any plan to turn
calendar escapes into a more general datatype escape mechanism.  The
problem is that "at" signs are allowed in IRIs, and does in `mailto`
IRIs or `http` IRIs with embedded userinfo.  A future version of ELF
might reserve a *character* for escaping *characters* within *escape
sequences*.  For example, `%{`&hellip;`}` might be used, something like
this: 

    @#T<https://userinfo%{40}example.com/>@
{/}


### Unicode escapes                                          {#unicode-escape}

A **Unicode escape** is a type of *escape sequence* that allows
arbitrary Unicode *characters* to be encoded ELF files, regardless of
the *character encoding* used for the file.  *ELF parsers* are
*required* to support *Unicode escapes*.

{.note}  This feature is new in ELF.  [GEDCOM 5.5.1] has no means of
encoding *characters* that cannot be encoded in the target *character
encoding*.  Even though ELF does not require applications to support
output in any *character encoding* other than UTF-8, it is anticipated
that many applications will continue to do so for compatibility reasons.
There are also situations where certain *characters* might get
misinterpreted and corrupted in transit or when processed by legacy
applications, and it would be safer to escape them.

*Unicode escapes* use the `U` *escape type* and has an *escape value*
which is a sequence of zero or more uppercase hexadecimal integers,
separate by spaces.  The hexadecimal integers are the *code points* of
the *characters* encoded by the *Unicode escape*.  Its *escape value*
*shall* matches the following `UnicodeEsc` production.

    UnicodeEsc  ::=  S? ( HexNumber (S HexNumber)* S? )?
    HexNumber   ::=  [0-9A-F]+

{.example ...} If the Portuguese name "`João`" is used in an ELF file
encoded with the ASCII *character encoding*, it *must* be encoded using
a *Unicode escape* such as this:

    1 NAME Jo@#UE3@o

This is not the only possible encoding of the name João.   If it written
with a combining tilde *character* (U+0303) instead of a precomposed 'a'
with tilde *character* (U+00E3), it could be encoded:

    1 NAME Joa@#U303@o

[Basic Concepts] allows any *string* to be converted into Unicode
Normalization Form C, which converts the latter form to the former, so
an *ELF writer* need not preserve the form in which the accented
character was originally entered.
{/}

{.example ...} The *Unicode escape* syntax allows multiple *characters*
to be encoded in a single *escape sequence*.  This allow a shorter and
easier to read encoding of names in non-Latin scripts.  For example, the
Arabic name عزيز‎ (Aziz) could be encoded in any of the following
ways:

    1 NAME عزيز
    1 NAME @#U639@@#U632@@#U64A@@#U632@
    1 NAME @#U 639 632 64A 632@
{/}


{.note}  Lower case hexadecimal digits *must not* be used in *Unicode
escapes*, so the Turkish letter 'ğ' *must not* be encoded as `@#U11f@`.

{.note}  ELF allows a *Unicode escape* to encode no *characters*.  An
example is `@#U@`.  These get deleted by an *ELF parser* during
unescaping, as described in {§payload-unesc}.  They are permitted
because they provide an alternative means of protecting necessary
trailing *whitespace* in a *string payload* that is to be read by a
legacy application or transmitted in a way that would otherwise remove
the *whitespace*.  Putting a `@#U@` at the end of the encoded *payload*
might be preferable to encoding the final *character* of *whitespace* if
the receiving application ignores the unknown *Unicode escape*.

*ELF writers* *must* use a *Unicode escape* to encode *characters* that
cannot be encoded in the target *character encoding*, but *should not*
use them otherwise without a specific need, and *should* prefer an
*escaped at sign* to a *Unicode escape* when escaping an "at" sign (U+0040).

{.note}  This is to maximise compatibility with [GEDCOM 5.5.1] which
does not have *Unicode escapes*, but which does support the *escaped
"at"*.

{.example}  An application *may* use *Unicode escapes* to escape the
first or last *character* of a *string payload* when it is *whitespace*,
if the ELF file is likely to be processed by a legacy GEDCOM application
which is known not to preserve leading or trailing *whitespace*, and if
preservation of that *whitespace* is important.  Such applications exist
because the [GEDCOM 5.5.1] is somewhat unclear on whether leading and
trailing *whitespace* had to be preserved, and different applications
have adopted different implementation strategies.

### Line continuation                                             {#line-cont}

ELF allows the *string payload* of a *structure* to be split across two
or more consecutive *lines*.  When this is done, the first *line* which
contains the start of the *string payload* is called the **continued
line** and the subsequent *line* or *lines* which contain the remainder
of the *string payload* are called **continuation lines**.  Any *line*
with a *tag* of `CONT` or `CONC` is a *continuation line*.

{.note} It is in principle possible for an ELF schema to assign other
*tags* for this purpose or to use these *tags* for other purposes, but
the [ELF Schemas] says this *must not* be done.

`CONT` *continuation lines* are used when the value encoded in a
*string payload* needs to contain *line breaks*.  The part of the
*string payload* following each *line break* is placed on a
*continuation line* using the `CONT` *tag*, and the *line break* itself
is removed from encoded version of the *payload*.

{.example ...} `CONC` *continuation lines* are commonly used when
preserving the layout of fragment of a text found in a source, such as
the following three lines of text found on a sepulchral brass:

    4 TEXT Pray for the soule of Edward Cowrtney esquyer secunde son
    5 CONT of sr Willm Cowrtney knyght of Povderam, which dyed the 
    5 CONT firrst day of mch Ano dom mvcix on whos soule ihu have mci
{/}

`CONC` *continuation lines* are used when it is desirable to split a
*string payload* which does not contain a convenient *line break*
across several *lines*.  The *payload* is split at an arbitrary place
which *should* be between two *characters* that are not *whitespace*.

{.note}  Although *ELF parsers* are *required* to support arbitrarily
long *lines*, it is *recommended* for compatibility with [GEDCOM 5.5.1]
that *ELF writers* *should* split *lines* in such a way that no *line
string* exceeds 255 *characters* in length.  It is *recommended* that
the split is mid-word because GEDCOM parsers have historically not
always preserved leading or trailing *whitespace* on lines.  If a
*string payload* is split adjacent to a *whitespace* *character* and the
result is read by such an application, the *whitespace* between two
words can become lost.

{.example ...}  `CONC` *continuation lines* can also be useful for
breaking *string payloads* when shorter *lines* are desirable – such as
to prevent the examples in this standard from line-wrapping.

    1 NOTE Prof. D. H. Kelley speculates that the mother of King Ecg
    2 CONC berht of Wessex was a daughter of Æthelbeorht II of Kent.

In the fragment above, the `NOTE` *structure* has a *string payload*
which contains no *line breaks* and where the name Ecgberht is single
word.
{/}

Applications *must not* assign significance to where `CONC`
*continuation lines* are inserted nor to how many are present in the
serialisation of a *string payload*.

{.ednote ...}  The TSC considered adding a third type of *continuation
line*, which would have provisionally used a `CONSP` *tag*.  It was
designed for splitting on a space *character* without relying on leading
or trailing *whitespace* being preserved in the *payload* of *lines*.
It would have worked like `CONT`, except that instead of replacing a
*line break* it would replace a space *character* (U+0020). 

    1 NOTE This is a long line which has been
    2 CONSP split using the new mechanism.

After further consideration and consultation it was felt that the use
cases for this were not sufficient to justify adding a new feature to
ELF, however the TSC welcome further opinions on this.
{/}



### Unescaping string payloads                                {#payload-unesc}

In order to unescape a *string payload* of a *structure*, an *ELF
parser* *shall* first identify all *escaped at signs* and *escape sequences*
in the *string payload* per {§identify-escs}, and verify that each
identified *escape sequence* is a *permitted escape* for the *structure*
in whose *payload* it was found, as described in {§permitted-escs}.

Next, each identified *escaped at sign* is replaced with a
single "at" sign, and each identified *Unicode escape* is replaced with
the *character* it encodes.  *Escape sequences* other than *Unicode
escapes* are left unaltered.

{.note ...}  Because all *escaped at signs* and *escape sequences* are
identified before any are unescaped, it is not possible to apply both
forms of escaping sequentially to a single *character*.  For example,
neither of the following *structures* are valid ways of encoding a
*string payload* consisting of a single "at" sign.

    0 NOTE @@#U40@@
    0 NOTE @#U40@@#U40@

The former is the *recommended* way of encoding a *payload* which
consists of the *string* "`@#U40@`", while the latter is an alternate
encoding (which is *not recommended*) of the *string* "`@@`".
{/}

Finally, any *substructures* corresponding to *continuation lines* are
identified and their *payloads* merged into the *payload* of their
parent *structure*, as described in {§merge-conts}.

{.note ...} As *continuation lines* are merged after *escaped at signs*
and *Unicode escapes* are unescaped, the *payload* of following
*structure* is the literal *string* "`@#U21@`" and not a exclamation
mark (U+0021):

    0 NOTE @
    1 CONC #U21@
{/}

#### Identifying escapes                                      {#identify-escs}

To identify all the *escaped at signs* and *escape sequences* in a
*string payload*, an *ELF parser* scans the string from beginning to end
looking for "at" signs (U+0040), and then inspects the next *character*,
if there is one, to determine how the "at" sign is to be interpreted.

If the following *character* is another "at" sign, then an *ELF parser*
*shall* identify the two "at" signs as an *escaped at sign*, and then resume
scan for "at" signs from the *character* following the second "at" sign.

{.example ...}  The `@@` in the *payload* of the following *structure*
is identified as an *escaped at sign*.

    1 EMAIL name@@example.com
{/}

Otherwise, if the following *character* is the number sign (`#`;
U+0023), then an *ELF parser* *shall* identify these two characters as
the start of an *escape sequence*, terminating at the subsequent "at"
sign.  If there is no subsequent "at" sign, or if the *string*
identified as an *escape sequence* does not match the `EscapeSeq`
production, the *structure* containing this *string payload* is a
*non-conformant structure*.  If a syntactically correct *escape
sequence* was identified, the *ELF parser* *shall* resume scanning for
"at" signs from the *character* following the second "at" sign.

{.example ...}  In this example, the `@#` is treated as the start of an
*escape sequence*, but because there is no subsequent `@`, it is a
*non-conformant structure*, and an *ELF parser* *must* either terminate
parsing or issue a warning to the user.

    0 NOTE Lines containing only a @# are non-conformant.
{/}

{.example ...} If the *character* immediately after the `@#` is not an
upper-case ASCII letter, the *escape sequence* does not match the
`EscapeSeq` production and the result is also a *non-conformant
sturcture*.  This example is a *non-conformant structure* for that
reason.

    0 NOTE Following a @# with a @ isn't necessarily conformant.
{/}

Otherwise, the "at" sign is treated as a regular *character*, and
scanning for "at" signs continues from the next *character*.  This
facility for treating unescaped "at" signs as regular *characters* is
*deprecated*.

{.example ...}  This applies in the following *structure*, where the
"at" sign has not been properly escaped.

    1 EMAIL name@example.com

*ELF parsers* *must* accept this, but a future version of ELF is likely
to make this a *non-conformant structure*.
{/}

{.example ...} The following table illustrates how some more complicated
*string payloads* are parsed into *strings*, *escaped at signs*, *escape
sequences* and bare "at" signs.

*String payload*                    Parsed as 
-------------------------------     ----------------------------------------------
"`name@example.com`"                "`name`", "`@`", "`example.com`"
"`name@@example.com`"               "`name`", "`@@`", "`example.com`"
"`name@@@example.com`"              "`name`", "`@@`", "`@`", "`example.com`"
"`name@@@@example.com`"             "`name`", "`@@`", "`@@`", "`example.com`"
"`some@#XYZ@thing`"                 "`some`", "`@#XYZ@ `", "`thing`"
"`some@@#XYZ@thing`"                "`some`", "`@@`", "`#XYZ`", "`@`", "`thing`"
"`some@@@#XYZ@thing`"               "`some`", "`@@`", "`@#XYZ@`", "`thing`"
"`@#XA@@#YB@`"                      "`@#XA@`", "`@#YB@`"
{/}

#### Permitted escapes                                       {#permitted-escs}

A **permitted escape** is an *escape sequence* with an *escape type*
that is permitted to occur in a particular *structure*.  If a *string
payload* contains an *escape sequence* other than an *permitted escape*,
the *structure* is a *non-conformant structure*.

If the application is *schema-aware*, *permitted escapes* are identified
as described in the [ELF Schemas] standard.  Otherwise, *permitted
escapes* are identified as described in this section.

If the *escape type* is `U`, then the *escape sequence* is a *permitted
escape*.

{.note}  *Unicode escapes* are not permitted in *serialisation metadata
structures*, however these have been removed from the document before
the *ELF parser* attempts to unescape the *payload*.

If the *escape type* is `D`, then the *escape sequence* is a *permitted
escape*.

{.example ...}  The following *structure* contains two instances of
*escape sequences* with the *escape type* `D`, which is denotes a
*calendar escape* in §3.1.1 of [ELF Dates].  Both uses are *permitted
escapes*, despite the fact that ages, as defined in §6 of [ELF Dates],
do not allow the use of *calendar escapes*.

    1 DEAT
    2 DATE @#DJULIAN@ 30 JAN 1649
    2 AGE @#DJULIAN@ 48y
{/}

{.note}  *Escape sequences* with the `D` *escape type* are *permitted
escapes* everywhere so that that serialisation layer is compatible with
future versions of ELF which may choose to allow *calendar escapes* in
other contexts.  For example, a future version of ELF could allow
*calendar escapes* to be used with ages because the length of a year can
depend on the calendar being used.  *Schema-aware* applications are 
better able to determine whether the *calendar escape* is really a
*permitted escape*.

An *escape sequence* with any other *escape type* is not a *permitted
escape*.

{.note}  This means that when a *non-schema-aware* application
encounters a *escape sequence* which is not defined in ELF 1.0, it
treats the *structure* containing it as a *non-conformant structure* and
*must* either issue a warning or terminate processing.  This behaviour
has been chosen because *escape sequences* are intended to be used in
ELF to represent processing instructions that need handling in the
serialisation layer.  This is how *escape sequences* were originally
used in GEDCOM and is true of *Unicode escapes* in ELF.  Calendar
escapes do not conform to this model, as they are interpreted by the
data model.  It is FHISO's current intention not to make further use of
data model *escape sequences* and eventually to *deprecate* calendar
escapes.  If a future version of ELF does introduce further *escape
sequences* which need handling in the data model, they will not be
backwards compatible with *non-schema-aware* ELF 1.0 applications.

#### Merging continuation lines                                 {#merge-conts}

*Substructures* with a *tag* of `CONC` or `CONT` are called a 
**continuation substructures**.  They correspond to *continuation
lines*.

{.note}  In a *schema-aware* application, the current *structure* has
been converted into a *typed structure* at the point when continuation
lines are merged as per this section, however their *substructures* have
not yet been converted.  Therefore, *continuation substructures* can be
identified by their *tag*, even in *schema-aware* applications.

A *continuation substructure* is a *malformed structure* if it has a
*cross-reference identifier*, or has a non-empty list of
*substructures*, or is a *substructure* of a *continuation
substructure*, or is preceded in the list of *substructures* by a
*structure* other than a *continuation substructure*.  Likewise, any
*record* whose *tag* is `CONT` or `CONC` is a *malformed structure*.

{.note}  *Continuation substructures* *may* have an empty *payload*, and
a *structure* *may* have a mixture of `CONC` and `CONT` *continuation
substructures*.

{.example ...}  The third *line* of this example is a *malformed
structure* because the `NOTE` *structure* has another *substructure*
before the *continuation substructure* – namely, the `REFN` *structure*.

    0 NOTE Start of note
    1 REFN 5bb43407-9f24-4b42-b00e-c32cc0f09d21
    1 CONT End of note
{/}

A *continuation substructure* is a *non-conformant structure* if it has
a *payload* which is a *pointer*.

{.example ...}  The second *line* of this example is a *non-conformant
structure* because it is a *continuation structure* whose *payload* is a
*pointer*.

    0 @N1@ NOTE This can be found in:
    1 CONT @F1@

The `NOTE` *line* is the *continued line*, and has a valid
*cross-reference identifier*.  It is only *continuation lines* and not
*continued lines* that *must not* have *cross-reference identifiers*.
{/}

{.note} *Continuation lines* containing *pointers* are considered a less
serious error than the other ways in which *continuation lines* might be
malformed.  This is because these are more likely to appear in legacy
data.  If these *lines* were considered *malformed structures*, an *ELF
parser* would be *required* to halt parsing on encountering them.  By
making them only *non-conformant structures*, an *ELF parser* *may*
still halt parsing, but *may* alternatively opt to issue a warning and
continue parsing, perhaps by treating the *pointer* as a *string
payload* instead.  

If a *structure* has any *continuation substructures*, each is merged
with the parent *structure* in the order they appear in the list of
*substructures*, as follows.

If a `CONC` *continuation substructure* is encountered, an *ELF parser*
*shall* first append a *line break* to the *payload* of the parent
*structure*.  The form of *line break* appended is
implementation-defined, but all inserted *line breaks* *must* have
identical lexical forms.

{.note}  A *line break* is defined in §2.1 of [Basic Concepts] as a line
feed (U+000A), carriage return (U+000D) or carriage return and line feed
pair (U+000D U+000A).  These are native line endings used on Unix, Linux
and modern Mac OS; older versions of Mac OS; and Windows, respectively.
It is anticipated, though not *required*, that an application will use
the relevant native form of *line break* for that platform.

Then, regardless of the type of *continuation substructure*, the 
*payload* of the *continuation substructure* *shall* be appended to the
*payload* of the parent *structure*, and the *continuation substructure*
is removed from the parent's list *substructures*.

{.example ...}  This `NOTE` *structure* has three *continuation
substructures* followed by one other *substructure*.

    0 NOTE This paragraph is sufficiently long that it has proved con
    1 CONC venient to wrap it onto a second line.
    1 CONT
    1 CONT This is a short paragraph.
    1 REFN 8e445bb6-cb27-4c12-8c74-e051395639c2

None of the *lines* in this example contain trailing *whitespace*.  Once
*continuation substructures* have been merged, this example consists of
a `NOTE` *structure* whose *string payload* is "`This paragraph is
sufficiently long that it has proved convenient to wrap it onto a second
line.\n\nThis is a short paragraph.`" In this explanation, `\n` denotes
a *line break* of unspecified form.  This is for exposition only and
does not form part of the ELF syntax.

After merging *continuation substructures*, the `NOTE` *structure* has
just one *substructure* – the `REFN` *structure*.
{/}

## Encoding with `@`

### Pointer conversion

If a *tagged structure* is pointed to by the *pointer*-valued *payload* of another *tagged structure*,
the pointe-to *tagged structure*'s corresponding *xref structure*
SHALL be given an **xref_id**, a *string* matching production `XrefID`.

    XrefID  ::= "@" ID "@"
    ID      ::= [0-9A-Z_a-z] [#x20-#x3F#x41-#x7E]*

It MUST NOT be the case that two different *xref structures* be given the same *xref_id*.
*Conformant* implementations MUST NOT attach semantic importance to the contents of an *xref_id*.

It is RECOMMENDED that an *xref_id* be no more than 22 characters (20 characters plus the leading and trailing U+0040)

{.note} [GEDCOM 5.5.1] REQUIRED that *xref_id* be no more than 22 characters. ELF weakens this to a RECOMMENDATION.

Each *record* SHOULD be given an *xref_id*;
each non-*record* *structure* SHOULD NOT;
and each *serialisation metadata* *tagged structure* MUST NOT be given an *xref_id*.

{.ednote} Since a pointed-to structure SHALL have an *xref_id* and a non-*record* MUST NOT,
implicitly a *structure* SHOULD NOT point to a non-*record*.
We should probably either make that explicit
or remove it---the latter may make more sense
as what is pointed to seems to be more a data model decision than a serialisation decision.
However, GEDCOM is fairly clear that pointers to non-*records*
might in the future be enabled with a non-standard *xref_id* syntax.

The *xref structure* that corresponds to a *tagged structure* with a *pointer*-valued *payload*
has, as its *payload*, an **xref**:
a *string* identical to the *xref_id* of the *xref structure* corresponding to
the pointed-to *tagged structure*.

When parsing, if *xref* *payloads* are encountered
that do not correspond to exactly one *xref structure*'s *xref_id*,
that *payload* SHALL be converted to to a *pointer* to a *record* with *tag* "`UNDEF`",
which SHALL NOT have a *payload* nor *substructures*.
It is *recommended* that one such "`UNDEF`" *tagged structure* be inserted
for each distinct *xref*.

{.note} The undefined pointer rule is designed to minimize the information loss
in the event of a bad serialised input.

{.note} This rule does not handle pointer-to-wrong-type; information needed to determine that is not known be serialisation and thus must be handled by the data model instead.

{.ednote} We could also allow pointer-to-nothing or pointer-to-multiple-things to be dropped from the dataset,
and/or provide disambiguation heuristics for pointer-to-multiple-things situations. This draft does not do so as it is not obvious that the benefit is worth the complexity.

### Escape preservation and removal

If the **escape type** is `U` (U+0055), the *escape* is a *unicode escape* and its handling is discussed in {§unicode-escape};
otherwise, it is handled according to this section.

#### Serialisation

If an *escape* is in the *payload* of an *tagged structure* whose *tag* is an *escape preserving tag*,
and if the escape*'s *escape type* is in the *tag*'s set of *preserved escape types*,
then the *escape* SHALL be preserved unmodified in the corresponding *xref structure*'s *payload*.

{.example} If a "`DATE`" *tagged structure* has *payload* "`ABT @#DJULIAN@ 1540`",
its corresponding *xref structure*'s *payload* is also "`ABT @#DJULIAN@ 1540`".

Otherwise, a modification of the *escape* SHALL be placed in the *xref structure*'s *payload*
which is identical to the original *escape* except that each of the two `@`
SHALL each be replaced with a pair of consecutive U+0040 `@`.

{.example} If a "`NOTE`" *tagged structure* has *payload* "`ABT @#DJULIAN@ 1540`",
its corresponding *xref structure*'s *payload* is "`ABT @@#DJULIAN@@ 1540`".

#### Parsing

If an *escape* is in the *payload* of an *xref structure* whose *tag* is an *escape preserving tag*,
and the escape*'s *escape type* is in the *tag*'s set of *preserved escape types*,
the *escape* SHALL be preserved unmodified in the corresponding *tagged structure*'s *payload*.

{.example} If a "`DATE`" *xref structure* has *payload* "`ABT @#DJULIAN@ 1540`",
its corresponding *tagged structure*'s *payload* is also "`ABT @#DJULIAN@ 1540`".

Otherwise, the *escape* SHALL be omitted from the corresponding *tagged structure*'s *payload*.

{.example} If a "`NOTE`" *xref structure* has *payload* "`ABT @#DJULIAN@ 1540`",
its corresponding *tagged structure*'s *payload* is "`ABT 1540`".

{.note} The decision to remove most *escapes* is motivated in part
because [GEDCOM 5.5.1] does not provide any meaning for an *escape* other than a *date escape*.
This caused some ambiguity in how such escapes were handled, which ELF seeks to remove.
Lacking a semantics to assign these *escapes*, ELF chooses to simply remove them.
Implementations that had assigned semantics to them
were actually imposing non-standard semantics to those payloads
which are more accurately handled by using an alternative *ELF schema* to map those *tags*
to different *structure type identifiers* with those semantics documented.


### Encoding `@`s

{.ednote ...} It might be worthwhile to restrict this entire section to non-*escape preserving tags*;
without that we have a (somewhat obscure) problem with the current system:

Consider the *escape-preserving tag* `DATE`.
A serialisation/parsing sequence applied to the *string* "`@@#Dx@@ yz`" yields

1. encoded "`@@#Dx@@ yz`"
2. decoded "`@#Dx@ yz`"
3. encoded "`@#Dx@ yz`" -- not with `@@` because it matches a date escape
{/}

During serialisation, each U+0040 (`@`) that is not part of an *escape*
SHALL be encoded as two consecutive U+0040 (`@@`).

{.example} The *tagged structure* *payload* "`name@example.com`"
is serialised as the *xref structure* *payload* "`name@@example.com`"

## Serialisation metadata

The *tagged structures* representing the *dataset* are ordered as follows:

1. A *serialisation metadata* *tagged structure* with *tag* "`HEAD`" and the following *substructures*:
    
    - A *serialisation metadata* *tagged structure* with *tag* "`CHAR`" and *payload* identifying the *character encoding* used; see {§encoding} for details.
    
    - A *serialisation metadata* *tagged structure* with *tag* "`SCHMA`"
      and no *payload*, with *substructures* encoding the *ELF Schema*.
    
    - Each *tagged structure* with the *superstructure type identifier* `elf:Metadata`,
        in an order consistent with the partial order of *structures* present in the *metadata*.

2. Each *tagged structure* with the *superstructure type identifier* `elf:Document`, in arbitrary order.

3. A *serialisation metadata* *tagged structure* with *tag* "`TRLR`" and no *payload* or *substructures*.
    
### Charcter encoding names                                        {#encoding}

The *character encoding* SHALL be serialised in the "`CHAR`" *tagged
structure*'s *payload* encoding name in the following table:

------    --------------------------------------------------------------------------
Encoding  Description
------    --------------------------------------------------------------------------
`ASCII`   The US version of ASCII defined in [ASCII].

`ANSEL`   The extended Latin character set for bibliographic use defined
          in [ANSEL].

`UNICODE` Either the UTF-16LE or the UTF-16BE encodings of Unicode
          defined in [ISO 10646].

`UTF-8`   The UTF-8 encodings of Unicode defined in [ISO 10646].
------    --------------------------------------------------------------------------

{.note}  This value is read as the *specified character encoding* per
{§specified-enc}.

It is REQUIRED that the encoding used should be able to represent all
*code points* within the *string*;
*unicode escapes* (see {§unicode-escape}) allow this to be achieved for any supported encoding.
It is RECOMMENDED that `UTF-8` be used for all datasets.


## References

### Normative references

[ANSEL]
:   NISO (National Information Standards Organization).
    *ANSI/NISO Z39.47-1993.
    Extended Latin Alphabet Coded Character Set for Bibliographic Use*.
    1993.  (See 
    <http://www.niso.org/apps/group_public/project/details.php?project_id=10>.)
    Standard withdrawn, 2013.

[Basic Concepts]
:   FHISO (Family History Information Standards Organisation).
    *Basic Concepts for Genealogical Standards*.  Public draft.
    (See <https://fhiso.org/TR/basic-concepts>.)

[ELF Schema]
:   FHISO (Family History Information Standards Organisation)
    *Extended Legacy Format (ELF): Schema.*

[ISO 10646]
:   ISO (International Organization for Standardization).
    *ISO/IEC 10646:2014.
    Information technology &mdash; Universal Coded Character Set (UCS).*
    2014.

[RFC 2119]
:   IETF (Internet Engineering Task Force).
    *RFC 2119: Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels.*
    Scott Bradner, 1997.
    (See <http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119>.)

[XML]
:   W3C (World Wide Web Consortium).
    *Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.1*, 2nd edition.
    Tim Bray, Jean Paoli, C. M. Sperberg-McQueen, Eve Maler, François Yergeau, 
    and John Cowan eds., 2006.  W3C Recommendation.
    (See <https://www.w3.org/TR/xml11/>.)

### Other references

[ASCII]
:   ANSI (American National Standards Institute).
    *ANSI X3.4-1986.
    Coded Character Sets -- 7-Bit American National Standard Code for Information Interchange (7-Bit ASCII)*.
    1986.

[GEDCOM 5.5]
:   The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
    *The GEDCOM Standard*, release 5.5.  1996.

[GEDCOM 5.5.1]
:   The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
    *The GEDCOM Standard*, draft release 5.5.1.  2 Oct 1999.

[ELF Data Model]
:   FHISO (Family History Information Standards Organisation)
    *Extended Legacy Format (ELF): Data Model.*

[ELF Dates]
:   FHISO (Family History Information Standards Organisation)
    *Extended Legacy Format (ELF): Date, Age and Time Microformats.*
    Public draft.  (See <https://fhiso.org/TR/elf-dates>.)

[RFC 4122]
:   IETF (Internet Engineering Task Force).
    *RFC 4122: A Universally Unique IDentifier (UUID) URN Namespace.*
    P. Leach, M. Mealling and R. Salz, 2005.
    (See <http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4122>.)

[Unicode]
:    The Unicode Consortium.
     *The Unicode Standard – Core Specification*, version 12.1.0.
     See <https://www.unicode.org/versions/Unicode12.1.0/>.

[XML Names]
:   W3 (World Wide Web Consortium).
    *Namespaces in XML 1.1*, 2nd edition.
    Tim Bray, Dave Hollander, Andrew Layman and Richard Tobin, eds., 2006.
    W3C Recommendation.
    See <https://www.w3.org/TR/xml-names11/>.

\vfill

----
Copyright © 2017–19, [Family History Information Standards Organisation,
Inc](https://fhiso.org/).
The text of this standard is available under the
[Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

